# What is probability?

A friend was expressing a certain amount of skepticism about the philosophical underpinnings of probability the other day. This post is an elaboration of the point I made in response to that.

As per the title, he basic question is what *is* probability? And what evidence do we have that it's a real thing?

Three possible answers ([there are more](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/probability-interpret/)) include:

* Probability represents some true underlying nondeterminism of the world (classical).
* Probability is a measure of belief (subjective)
* Probability is a long-run average of how often a thing would happen if you repeated the same experiment (frequentist)

Which of these is the "right" interpretation?
Well, all of them, and none of them.

Probability is not a real thing. Or rather, probability is not a property of real things, but of mathematical objects.
Real things don't "have" probabilities, but instead acquire them by making analogies with particular mathematical models. In particular the same real object may have different pr Probability is a mathematical tool we have used to reason about real things, but it's not a property of reality, it's a property of mathematical models.obabilities depending on the translation.

This isn't to say that probability doesn't exist. [Like numbers](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2019-02-21-18:58.html), probability both exists and is something we made up.
It describes a set of formal rules that abstract systems have to obey to count as probability.
Exactly what these are is a bit technical, but roughly the setup is as follows:

1. We have some set of states, which could e.g. be possible configurations of some system.
2. Have have some properties of states can ask about.
3. To each such property \(A\) we associate a number \(0 \leq p(A) \leq 1\), the probability of \(A\).

There are a number of rules these have to satisfy, and I won't get into technicalities around infinity are, but the main things that are important:

* We can reverse any property, so if we have the property \(A\) we also have the property \(\neg A\) which holds exactly when \(A\) doesn't.
* If we have properties \(A\) and \(B\) we can ask "Are both A and B true for this state?" (\(A \wedge B\)) and "Is at least one of A or B true?" (\(A \vee B\))
* A property that all states have has probability \(1\), and a property tha tno states have has probability \(0\) (note: The converses are not necessarily true. It's possible to have probability \(0\) questions that are true for some state and probability.
* If A and B cannot both be true, then the probability of is the sum of the probabilities of A and B.

These rules are basically designed to capture the idea that a probability captures the proportion of states which the question holds, weighted in some way.

Often these state spaces are designed to be in some way representative of the real world
