# The people that live in your head

There's [a good Twitter question](https://twitter.com/search?f=tweets&vertical=default&q=https%3A%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FDrunkestLibrary%2Fstatus%2F1066346270992842752&src=typd) about books that have changed your worldview for the better. A lot of the ones listed are fiction, including mine.

A [related question I asked the other day](https://twitter.com/DRMacIver/status/1065381021158449153) was about genre fiction provides good role models.

Although the primary purpose of fiction is of course entertainment, the primary *benefit* of fiction is that it [fills your head with people](https://www.drmaciver.com/2015/03/how-to-make-other-people-seem-like-humans/).

There's a study from a few years back about how reading fiction improves theory of mind:

> Kidd, David Comer, and Emanuele Castano. "Reading literary fiction improves theory of mind." Science 342.6156 (2013): 377-380. 

Their conclusions were that literary fiction does improve theory of mind and popular fiction does not. I'm a little skeptical of this claim - it's not that I doubt their conclusions in the particular experiment, but I think the implications are far less general than they claim.

I think a more reasonable (but perhaps less exciting / conducive to sharpening the axe they want to grind) set of conclusions would be:

1. Reading fiction *can* improve your theory of mind.
2. Which fiction you read may have a dramatic effect on how well it achieves that.

For example I think reading Pratchett's witches books is likely to have a very strong impact on your theory of mind (it did for me), while reading, say, Xanth might go as far as to having a *negative* impact on your theory of mind.

That being said, while quality is of course important, I think quantity has a virtue all of its own, as long as there is a reasonable diversity of failure modes in that quantity.
The nice thing about genre fiction is that people can and do read a lot of it, which gives you a large number of people in your head.

This is one of the reasons why having a good range of diversity of authors and protagonists is helpful - it begins to give you a theory of mind that encompasses a wide range of human experience.
