# Can a machine design?

[Can a machine design?](http://echo.iat.sfu.ca/library/cross_01_machine_des.pdf) by Nigel Cross is an interesting paper about architecture (the real kind!) and its relation to automation.
I found it via Adam Marshall Smith's PhD thesis [Mechanizing exploratory game design](https://adamsmith.as/papers/mechanizing_exploratory_game_design_book.pdf) (truthfully via [this tweet](https://twitter.com/maxkreminski/status/964923822766833664) about it from Max Kreminski),
which is an excellent thesis on mechanically assisted creativity (I must admit I skimmed the technical content as less relevant to me - I care about the meta more than I care about game design qua game design).

Most relevant quote for me:

> Despite this apparently
> easy pace of interaction, all of the designers reported that they
> found the experiments hard work and stressful. They reported that
> the main benefit of using the "computer" was increased work
> speed, principally by reducing uncertainty (i.e., they relatively
> quickly received answers to queries, which they accepted as reliable
> information).
> I also tried a few variations from my standard experiments. The most interesting was to reverse the normal set of expectations of the functions of the designer and the "computer."
> The "computer" was given the job of having to produce a design to the
> satisfaction of the observing designer. It immediately was apparent
> that, in this situation, there was no stress on the designer—in fact, it
> became quite fun—and it was the "computer" that found the experience
> to be hard work. 

i.e. it's much more fun to tweak a computer's output than it is to be critiqued by one.
An important observation for people in correctness research I think!
