# (Partial) Book Review: [Focusing by Eugene T Gendlin ](https://amzn.to/2NRXaM5)

Let me tell you a thing that happened recently, as a series of events:

1. Someone I casually knew from the internet told me that I should read a book to solve the problems with my life.
2. I read the intro of the book and went "Wow this book is culty. I have been invited to join a literal cult."
3. I read the rest of the book and went "Hmm yes the author is actually a very reasonable person and is making some good points."
4. I went to a friend and said "I've just read a great book and I want you to read it, here let me buy you a copy."

Is this how it starts? Am I in a cult now?

I don't *think* I'm in a cult now.

This book is quite good. The introduction is terrible and goes full on woo "Your western science can't explain this!!!",
to a degree where I almost put the book down and probably wouldn't have except that it's really short and TBH I really need *something* in this space,
but it then settles down into being a slightly breathless self-helpy take that is well within the the Overton window of normal body oriented psychotherapy,
and is a fairly lucid presentation of what appears to be very good advice.

A lot of why I sent a copy to my friend Alex is because she actually studies this stuff and wanted a second opinion on how much I should trust the book's advice - either she'd tell me it was complete rubbish, which if true would be useful information, or it would be highly relevant to her interests, so win-win either way.
In conversation we discovered that [Meg-John Barker's Staying with Feelings Zine](https://rewritingtherules.files.wordpress.com/2016/03/stayingwithfeelingszine1.pdf) actually recommends this approach,
which also gave me a reasonable amount of faith that it's probably reasonable. Meg-John Barker is great.

Anyway, all of this came later. The process of reading the book was much more straightforward.
It took me about three hours, and provoked a remarkably strong emotional reaction which is a bit too personal for me to talk about here.
I'm still processing this, and I need to reread and study the book a bit more before I feel like I've fully understood it or "done it properly",
but I think if I get nothing out of it other than the one partial insight I got from reading it, that's three hours and £7 well spent.

The book is basically an instruction manual for Focusing's [Six Steps](http://www.focusing.org/sixsteps.html), which are a reflective technique for understanding your own emotions.
The core feature of Focusing is that you stop trying to either ignore or analyze your emotions, and step over and let the *other* biocomputer that is an integral part of your existence, your body,
have a chance to point out some useful things you've been ignoring.

At least as importantly as explaining the six steps, it also contains a remarkably detailed set of debugging instructions for when you struggle to follow the core instructions.

I need to reread the book, and I need to think more about this, but I will definitely be doing that.
Until I've done that I'd say any recommendation I can make for it is distinctly qualified,
but for now I weakly recommend reading this book, and expect that on further reflection the strength of that recommendation will increase.
