# Separating Impulse from Action

Here's a trick I figured out yesterday. It solves quite a specific problem that I have, but you might have similar problems, and even if not I think it demonstrates some useful general principles that could be applied in other circumstances.

The problem is this: I buy too many books.

It's not a *disaster* because I also read a lot of books, but I buy books at a higher rate than I read them, and I often buy books that I later decide that actually I'm not realistically going to read.

The problem is basically that when I encounter an interesting book whose ideas I would like inside my brain, I often impulsively buy it.

Some of this is a problem of impulse control, for sure, and I could definitely fix it by being better at impulse control, but currently I'm trying to be *less* good at impulse control, so that seems counterproductive.

An additional complication is that the correct amount of books for me to be buying is not zero. I *could* just blanket ban myself from buying books. I would experience it as unpleasant, but it's manageable, but that would not result in my buying the right number of books.
I *do* read a lot of books (typically between one and three a week, not counting fiction which are a separate category because I read them as ebooks), and I like having new books around, and I can definitely afford to spend a certain amount of money on books.

The additional complicating factor is that my bookshelves serve as a kind of... thoughts I want to have later? They're a TODO list for reading, and my experience is that I will lose track of digital TODO lists for reading - they will get too large, and I will forget about them and leave them to rot (I am even worse at digital [care work](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2020-04-30-15:20.html) than physical).

So, I:

1. Have a constant impulse to buy books, and suppressing it will be unpleasant.
2. Do actually want to buy a non-zero amount of books.
3. Need a way to keep track of the books I may want to buy later.

Anyway, there's an easy solution, and it's [kinda stupid](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2020-05-07-07:57.html) that it's taken me this long to realise it.

The solution that satisfies all of these is to have:

1. a default Amazon list of books I wanted to buy.
2. a scheduled task every Sunday to buy a book.

Now when I want to impulse buy a book I instead just click the add to list button instead of the buy now button. Then, every Sunday, I go through the list and decide which of these books is the one I want to buy the most right now. In the course of doing so, I remove any books from the list that I'm definitely sure I won't want to buy later.

This solution is actually very good, because it:

* puts the rate at which I buy things under my conscious control independently of the impulse to buy things (a thing I learned the value of from years with [Beeminder](http://beeminder.com/)).
* gives a direct and (almost) equally satisfying replacement for the impulse activity by pressing a different and equally accessible button.
* fights the digital rot that lists normally have for me by coupling it to a regularly scheduled activity that I *want* to do because I get rewarded with a book.

In addition I think it will significantly increase the quality of the books I do buy, because each book I buy will be a measured choice between alternatives where invest some effort in ensuring that my book this week will be a good one. I don't intend to [avoid all error](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2020-02-25-10:39.html) and I of course [can't ensure I always pick the *best* one](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2020-04-17-10:16.html), but I'm pretty sure that investing about twenty minutes of thought into the question will result in me improving on impulse decisions.
