# Standardised Facts

From [Seeing Like a State](https://amzn.to/2ZB2wmE) by James C. Scott, page 80:

> State simplifications have at least five characteristics that deserve emphasis. Most obviously, state simplifications are observations of only those aspects of social life that are of official interest. They are *interested*, utilitarian facts. Second, they are also nearly always written (verbal or numerical) *documentary* facts. Third, they are typically *static* facts. Fourth, most stylized state facts are also *aggregate* facts. Aggregate facts may be impersonal (the density of transportation networks) or simply a collection of facts about individuals (employment rates, literacy rates, residence patterns). Finally, for most purposes, stateofficials need to group citizens in ways that permit them to make a collective assessment. Facts that can be aggregated and presented as averages or distributions must therefore by *standardized* facts. However unique the actual circumstances of the various individuals who make up the aggregate, it is their sameness or, more precisely, their differences along a standardized scale or continuum that are of interest.

This is a very interesting passage that I think I probably just nodded and skimmed over when first reading this book. I find that often the random page approach is a good way of highlighting such passages.

I don't have a huge amount to say about this passage right now (because I'm ill and it's hot and as a result I am quite stupid today) but I feel like it's especially relevant right now during the COVID-19 epidemic, where we're seeing a lot of this sort of thing. Death rates, hospitalisation rates, etc. are very much an example of standardised facts, and are eliding a lot of the weird and very unpleasant ways in which people's COVID-19 symptoms differ.
