# Study: What is a conative drive?

Today I thought I'd do a study (one hour timebox of writing as I learn) on Experiences of Depression by Matthew Ratcliffe, slightly closer in format to Lucy's original speedruns in that I'm trying to answer a specfic question..

Specifically I would like to look at the following paragraph from page 177, and surrounding context:

> Fuchs suggests that depression involves disturbances of both implicit and explicit time. He distinguishes two aspects of implicit time: its ‘affective-conative momentum’ and what Husserl calls its ‘protentional-retentional’ structure (Fuchs, 2013b). By ‘conative’ drive, Fuchs means a temporal orientation that we ordinarily take for granted, which also comprises a disposition towards activity. It is not a matter of having explicit desires or motives, but of feeling drawn towards a meaningful future in a manner that such attitudes presuppose.

I'd like to ask the following question of this paragraph: What the fuck does *that* mean?

The concept of conative drive has stuck with me as a description of something that sounds important but that I don't really understand what it means, so I thought it would be worth a try.

As a first pass I thought I would look up the reference, which is "Temporality and psychopathology" by Thomas Fuchs. Helpfully, the phrase "conative drive" never appears in this paper.

He does have this to say:

> The second prerequisite for implicit temporality is the basic “energetic”
> momentum of mental life which can be expressed by concepts such as drive,
> striving, urge or affection, which — unlike the more “cognitive” protentional–
> retentional structure — I would like to call affective–conative momentum, or in
> short, conation.

With the following footnote explaining the etymology of conation:

> From the Latin conatus=endeavour, effort, drive, urge. The concept dates back to Stoic philosophy and
was later used by Hobbes and Spinoza in particular to denote the living being’s striving for self-preservation
(conatus sese conservandi), in close connection with affective–volitional life. For further reading, see e.g. Lin 2004.

Lin 2004 is "Spinoza’s Metaphysics of Desire" by Martin Lin, which has me going "Oh no Spinoza", but let's at least check it out.

Unfortunately it does not mention the words "conative" or "conation", which appear to be coinages by Fuchs, but instead talks about *conatus*, and Spinoza's "conatus dotrine", which is:

> Each thing, insofar as it is in itself, strives to persevere in its being.

This is obviously false, which makes sense because Spinoza reliably uses words incorrectly (he very likely has some highly technical definition of "thing", "in itself", and "being" that cause the sentence to mean something different and more complicated than it literally reads as, and still be wrong) and also believes ridiculous things, but perhaps this captures the idea that is being described here somewhat, or maybe these are both just about striving.

Also just looking it up in [wiktionary](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/conation) which I definitely should have done first, Conation is:

> The power or act which directs or impels to effort of any kind, whether muscular or psychical.

