# You don't learn in a straight line

Here's another abandoned draft from the newsletter archive.

I'd like to talk about learning things, and how the way we learned as
children

## Learning things in order

Have you ever thought about what determines the order you learn things
in? Some things you learn at the same time of course, but you're
learning throughout your life and so inevitably you learn some things
before others.

Sometimes there's no particular rhyme or reason to the ordering. I
learned to play the bassoon before I learned to program, but likely
plenty of people do it the other way around, and that's not not
particularly surprising, and many people learn only one or neither of
them. There's no dependency between the two, the only thing determining
the order is the particular details of my life story. Call that a
*coincidental ordering*.

But other things the order feels more intrinsic. You have to learn to
walk before you have to learn to run. You have to learn to read before
you learn to write.

This is an order where there is some sort of *dependency* *ordering*
between the two. It might in theory be logically possible to learn to
write before you learn to read, or to learn to run before you learn to
walk, but it's pretty hard to imagine there being common circumstances
under which that makes sense (Not completely impossible, mind. I learned to swim before I learned to
walk, and I can imagine that there might be effective ways of teaching
that teach reading and writing simultaneously).

But do you have to learn to run before you learn to read? It's clearly
not logically necessary, and it's also not universally the case. Some
people will never run at all, due to physical disabilities. Presumably
some people will have developmental delays in their gross motor skills
but not fine motor skills, delaying when they learn to run, so it's
fairly likely that there are people out there who learned to write
before they learned to run, and maybe even before they learned to walk.

You can think of this particular type of dependency as a *typical
ordering*. It's one that's determined by the normal developmental
development of children: Most people are ready to learn one thing before
they're ready to learn the other, and it's good (or we think it's good)
for them to learn it as soon as they're ready.

## Teaching things in order

There's a little bit of a sleight of hand up there, did you notice? What
does it mean to learn to write?

Well, let me give you a clue: I was in my mid teens before I learned to
write to the standard that we expect most kids to write before they're
10, and arguably I'm still not there. Also, before I was 10, I was
writing very well (by the standards we'd judge someone of that age).

How does this work? Well, "writing" means two different things here.
When we talk about teaching kids to write, we primarily talk about
teaching them to *handwrite*. This is bottlenecked on the development of
their fine motor coordination, not on their verbal ability, and my fine
motor coordination lagged considerably behind my verbal development
(this is part of something called dyspraxia). As a result, my "writing"
in the sense of "handwriting" was terrible, but if you put me in front
of a keyboard I could write pretty competently.

I honestly don't remember the details of how much trouble this caused me
in school. After a while of struggling I just refused to write in
anything other than block capitals (I eventually learned to fix this, no
thanks to the schooling), and this "solved" the problem by aging out of
the period where any teacher thought it was their job to comment on my
handwriting, but the period up to that point was I think pretty
stressful.

More importantly, it was a stress that permeated *everything*, because
every class I was in expected me to be able to handwrite my answers (I
could at least type homework in some cases).

You can think of this perhaps as a *normative ordering* in how we learn
things. It's not that there's actually any logical necessity to learn to
handwrite to any reasonable standard before you learn, say, history or
physics, but the entire system is set up to give you a pretty bad time
if you don't.

I don't really consider this a great injustice perpetrated against me -
at the time computers were more expensive and generally less widespread
than they are now. It would have been genuinely hard to computerise
everything, and there are still major challenges to that today. But it
was still a problem I experienced that I wouldn't have with another way
of teaching (There's a whole complicated story with me getting special permission to
use a laptop at school that I won't get into here because it's besides
the point, and I compensated OK by being otherwise good at the subjects
I cared about, so I don't know that I suffered much in the way of
lasting consequences from this, but it was at best unpleasant at the
time.)

This problem gets worse with people who have reading difficulties (e.g.
because dyslexia). A lot of subjects could in theory be taught purely
orally - you don't actually need to be able to read to do philosophy for
example, and many classic philosophers were actively against reading and
writing - but the way we teach them is intimately tied up with reading
and writing.

To be clear, I'm not saying this is bad. I'm saying this is a trade off,
where we have adopted a particular style of teaching that works for most
people, and some people get a worse deal under this trade off than
others because of their specific difficulties.

## Typical orderings become normative

I apparently never wrote this section, but the basic idea feels fairly obvious to me: If it's super convenient to teach in one set order, then that order becomes widely adopted, and it's not long before failing to learn in that order is treated as a problem with the student instead of the system.

## Postscript

No idea why I abandoned this one. It feels like it's only a short section away from being complete. I may just have got distracted.
