# Historical contingency

Here's another piece from draft bankruptcy. I don't seem to have got very far with it and don't know where I was going with it, but what's here is interesting. The original title was "Life is made of found things" but that's too good a title to let languish in ddraft bankruptcy and I mostly didn't cover the relevant bits.

An early event that I can point to as crucial to how my life has turned
out was a Christmas gift from a family friend, of the GURPS second
edition basic set (the rules for a roleplaying game).

This isn't because GURPS has been a particularly major influence on my
life (Though it was honestly quite good creativity training, and introduced me
to the warehouse 23 basement [which is also very good for grinding a
particular skill
set](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2021-07-11-11:03.html)), it just set
certain wheels in motion. It got me into particular online communities,
where I made a friend, Greg, who was a couple years older than me and
already at Cambridge university. When it came to applying to Cambridge I
didn't honestly have much basis for deciding which college I went to,
and he made a good case for his (Pembroke), which checked out and so I
applied there.

This may seem like a pretty bad way to pick a college, and perhaps it
was, but I think the reality was that there were many equally good
options, and not much basis to choose between them, so picking one and
verifying that it works well isn't a bad way to do it. I can't say
Pembroke was the optimal choice, but it was a fairly respectable
[satisfice](https://www.drmaciver.com/2019/10/vocabulary-building-satisficing/).

Once at Pembroke, I met particular people, made particular friends, had
particular supervisors and life advice. Other colleges would probably
have been about equally good - in some ways better, in some ways worse,
but importantly they would have been *different*. I'd have met different
people, who would have influenced me in different ways, and my life path
would have diverged substantially as a result.

Given how large the effect of a single Christmas gift was, it seems fair
to say that at some point in those four years something would have gone
differently enough that I'd be a very different person today for the
change.

This is *historical contingency*. The way your life turns out depends a
great deal on prior conditions, and on the choices you make, and the
type of person you are, but it also just depends on chance happenstance
and the knock on effects of it.

## Two-road chances

I'm a big fan of the book "Trickster makes this world".

I found this book because it's recommended in Chuck
Palahniuk's (Yes, the fight club guy) "Consider This", a
book about writing, where he lists it among a number of other books that
will fundamentally change your view of the world. I think he was right,
but I'd perhaps struggle to describe exactly how. Let me try.

(Reader: I didn't try)

## More contigency

This was originally a very long footnote, but my notebook doesn't currently support footnotes (I'd like it to, but it's fiddly for various reasons)

I read "Consider This" because someone on [bookchat
discord](https://discord.gg/8GtRapR) recommended it, in the \#writing
channel. Bookchat discord exists... I don't remember exactly why. Doing
some research on Twitter identifies the seed of the idea here.


<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr"><a href="https://t.co/ky6KcwnCTN">https://t.co/ky6KcwnCTN</a> gives me so many feels.<br><br>A thing I&#39;ve been finding deeply frustrating is the difficulty of talking about how much I read without making everyone around me (typically fellow readers) feel guilty about their comparatively smaller reading list.</p>&mdash; David R. MacIver (@DRMacIver) <a href="https://twitter.com/DRMacIver/status/1133686806711590912?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 29, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I can't remember exactly why I read that. Probably because I'd read "The
Year of Reading Dangerously", which I'd read... I think as a result of a
family Christmas present project I was doing? I think it was 2018 that I
created a small family library, which was well received but didn't
actually result in much increase in reading I think.

I didn't actually publicise the discord until some months later:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I&#39;ve just remembered that ages ago I was talking about starting a book chat group and got as far as setting up a discord server for it and then got distracted. I still like the idea, so lets give it a go. <a href="https://t.co/MoYdiUAne3">https://t.co/MoYdiUAne3</a></p>&mdash; David R. MacIver (@DRMacIver) <a href="https://twitter.com/DRMacIver/status/1203288683262218240?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">December 7, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I believe this was my first foray into discord, which I knew about
because of a conversation with a friend of a friend some time earlier
(probably in 2018?) in which he expounded on how discord was the future
of social and we were all like "What? Discord? Isn't that a gaming
thing?".

I can chart this lineage further, but it's not that exciting. Mostly I'm
pointing out that a lot of historical contingency happened here too.

## Postscript

I apparently keep failing to write about "Trickster makes this world", as this was also the point at which I abandoned [How to be lucky](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2022-05-25-09:47.html).

In general I am surprisingly bad at writing about books I've read.
