# Promethean work

This is another draft bankruptcy post. The following is the only
bit I had written from a post entitled "Stealing lifehacks from the gods":

Do you ever think about how weird it would be to be in the myth of
Prometheus?

> Prometheus stumbles into camp, looking haggard.
>
> "Prometheus, you have returned from Mount Olympus! What have you
> brought back from your time among the gods?"
>
> "Uh, well, I've brought back the secret of fire. Pretty sure that'll
> be helpful. Very useful stuff, fire."
>
> "Tell us, oh great Prometheus! What powers must we invoke to summon
> fire? What rituals must we perform?"
>
> "Um, yes. Rituals. OK, so, you take some dry grass, and two sticks."
>
> "Grass... and sticks? Do we fashion these into an offering? Do we
> carve runes into them?"
>
> "No, you see, what you do is, you rub the sticks together. After a
> while they'll get real hot. Then you put the hot sticks on the grass
> and it'll catch fire because dry things catch fire when they get hot."
>
> "What the actual fuck, Prometheus."
>
> "Yeah, kicking myself for not thinking of it on my own TBH. Still,
> it's a simple enough trick that at least the gods won't be super mad
> at me for borrowing it, huh?"

(Please note that this both entirely misrepresents [the myth of
Prometheus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prometheus) and also [how to
start a fire with sticks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l8C8qPoMZdo).
But in my defence it's funnier that way)

## Postscript

This actually [got turned into a tweet](https://twitter.com/DRMacIver/status/1521187395319836676) way earlier,
and was probably more like a tweet worth of idea.

The core to this is that a lot of what I do is go into complicated specialised disciplines and try to take their most accessible ideas and make them broadly useful. This is Promethean work.

Another [related tweet](https://twitter.com/DRMacIver/status/1520007832556474368):

> If I have seen far, it is because I have repeatedly wandered up to giants and asked "Gosh! How did you get so tall?"
