# When details matter

This is an experiment to see if it works: I often use a random book prompt to write, with the basic protocol being to pick a random page, find an interesting passage, and write something inspired by it. I was wondering this morning, what would happen if I took *two* prompts, from different books?

Let's find out. This will not have quite the normal format of the book prompted essays because I'd like to work through the thought process a bit more carefully.

The books I've picked are "The Golem" by Collins and Pinch, a book about how science is done through the lens of various controversies (some of which got accepted, some of which didn't), and "Talking about machines", a book about how photocopier repair technicians at Xerox work. I picked these two because I like them both and they have similar colour covers.

Despite the mostly arbitrary choice, the books feel related in some ways, in that they're both ethnographies of technical work, but I'm not sure I could articulate a common theme between them so much as a common method. Maybe they're both about how skill is implicitly shared in communities in ways that are very tied in to credibility and personal connections.

Picked purely at random from The Golem, page 117 - 118:

> Often in the course of a scientific controversy previously ignored minutiae become highly relevant and hotly debated. As both sides try to cast doubt upon the others' arguments, more and more additional pieces of evidence get brought in. In the  present case [about whether a certain species of parthenogenic lizards engaged in "pseudo-copulation"] the number of bites the lizards underwent and whether or not they wave their hands as a sign of sexual submission both became important.
>
> Cuellar argued that in species he had collected in the wild he had rarely seen any 'copulation bites' and more would be expected if pseudo-copulation was routine. The answer Crews and his group gave was again to reverse the argument by pointing out that if Cuellar was right then it would mean that normal sexual lizards were not mating either! The answer, they suggested, was that such bites are not a natural inscription of mating. To try to substantiate their point they examined the corpses of 1000 dead female lizards from a sexual species and found only 3% had marks on their backs and sides and, further, that the same frequency of males possessed such marks. So in this way Crews managed to turn the evidence produced by Cuellar back against him. Marks are most certainly found on dead lizards, but as they are found on males as well they are probably produced by aggressive behaviour.
> 
> Hand waving became significant in a postscript added by Cole and Townsend to their rebuttal of Crews. They criticise Crews for 'erroneously' relying on the lizards' lifting of the hand as an of submissiveness. Instead, according to them, it is merely a sign that the lizard is basking. Again it is the competence of the researchers which is under attack. A researcher  who cannot tell basking from hand waving has a credibility problem. 

When I picked purely at random from Talking About Machines I landed on page 53, which is a bit in the middle of a long story. Scanning backwards until I get to a good start I come to the following passage from page 51 that starts it off:

> At this point, Frank has done all the replacements and repairs this machine seems to need. The next step in the process is the xerographic setup, adjusting all the different components that contribute to making a good copy. In this machine the process is substantially automated; if all goes well, the technician only needs to enter some numbers. Frank knows the sequence by heart. While the process is running, he starts on the paperwork for the service call, listing the different things he has done and the parts he has replaced. Then the automatic xerographic setup stops; the display complains of Error 7. He looks up Error 7 in the documentation and learns that it means that the machien cannot adjust the copy contrast. The manual tells him to look at the xerographic system.

What begins is then a long process of debugging that goes on for several pages and that I cannot adequately summarise here, but involves systematically checking a lot of things, identifying a potentially problematic part, and tinkering with various numbers in order to get them into the acceptable level.

(This combination of passages briefly made me want to pull in a third book, "Seeing What Others Don't" by Gary Klein, for his discussion of contradictions, but I couldn't immediately make it work and decided to resist the urge to go down that rabbit hole).


