# More thoughts on throwing money at the Collatz Conjecture

[Michael Nielsen recently tweeted](https://twitter.com/michael_nielsen/status/1494672423597211653) about my previous post [Can you throw money at the Collatz conjecture?](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2021-07-30-09:52.html) in which I posed the question as to whether, given $1 billion in funding, you could solve the Collatz conjecture in a decade. This, and in particular [Tim Gowers's response](https://twitter.com/wtgowers/status/1494696480137007105) have me thinking about the problem again.
I'm a bit more optimistic about this than I was last time. I don't think the answer is obviously yes, but I think you could take a pretty good shot at it, and that it might even be a good idea to do so. I'd like to sketch out some ideas as to how.

It follows the following general principles:

1. Create high gradient environments that build useful technology for solving the problem incrementally.
2. Build technical and pedagogical infrastructure for helping people become better at solving the problem.
3. Create a lot of of room for free exploration of things only very loosely related to the problem.
4. Use a lot of computers.

The idea of a "high gradient" environment is that it's much easier to get better if you know what getting better looks like. For example, Tim Gowers pointed out that the answer is much more likely to be yes if the Collatz conjecture is false. And trying to refute the Collatz conjecture has a much clearer direction than trying to prove it - you "just" try to find longer and longer Collatz sequences (normalised in some way so that you can't just do it by trying bigger numbers - for example the length of the sequence / log(n) should, heuristically, be bounded above, so trying to increasingly large values of that is an interesting challenge).

In support of this, it's worth building a lot of software infrastructure. You could employ an entire team of programmers whose job was solely to maintain and develop increasingly optimised versions of a function that answers the question "Does the Collatz sequence starting from n reach 1 in fewer than k steps?". Another high gradient environment is to optimise this function so that increasingly large values of n are viable.


