# How can we create healthy geniuses?

A recurring talking point in parts of where I hang out on Twitter is
something along the lines of "hypercompetence is a sign of trauma,
healthy individuals aren't hypercompetent". This seems to me to be
broadly true, but I think it's true for nonobvious reasons that I'd like
to explore.

## What is Hypercompetence?

Hypercompetence is some truly unusual degree of expertise in some
specific skill. People are not, generally, hypercompetent in some fully
general sense, they are hypercompetent at something in particular. This
might be a professional skill (mathematics, writing, golf, etc), a
hobby, a social skill, or something else entirely.

I think it is worth distinguishing hypercompetence from normal
expertise. Expertise is normal - you just have to work hard at getting
good at a thing, and eventually you will be. In the sense of [Difficult
Problems and Hard
Work](https://drmaciver.substack.com/p/difficult-problems-and-hard-weeks),
for most people and skills, acquiring expertise in that skill is just
hard work rather than a difficult problem. The hypercompetent individual
however is somehow on a whole other level.

The distinguishing feature of hypercompetence is not that it is
*competence* but that it is *hyper*. You look at them compared to their
peers, and there is a major qualitative difference between them that
seemingly cannot be explained by normal skill development. I'm imagining
here someone like [Paul
Erdős](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Erd%C5%91s), who was just the
most ridiculously prolific
mathematician.

(Also a good example of "healthy people aren't hypercompetent". If the
price for being as good as Paul Erdős was that you had to be Paul Erdős,
I cannot imagine many people would take that deal.)

Here is a diagram. It may not make much sense because I am bad at
drawing diagrams, but *I* find it helpful.

![](https://bucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com/public/images/dced7dc9-7adb-4bc4-8e3f-a6db0f91287f_778x739.png)

In this diagram imagine each vertical line is a person at their skill
level, so the width of the shaded area is proportionate to the number of
people at that skill level (not realyl to scale - the spike in the
middle is meant to be a single person, but I broadened it for clarity).
So you've got a normal level of expertise that gradually tapers off as
you go up, and then you've got the hypercompetent individual who is out
there on their own, as much above the normal experts as the normal
experts are above the average member of the population.

In contrast, the following person is exactly as competent as the
hypercompetent individual in our above example, but the skill level
smoothly climbs towards their level:

![](https://bucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com/public/images/8b93ca0e-9680-4be7-90e9-77a3847c9180_778x739.png)

They are no less skilled than the hypercompetent individual, and they
are still the most competent individual in the population, but the key
difference is that they are surrounded by people who are only slightly
less competent than they are. There is a clear path to where they are,
with every step along the way populated.

I am fairly into the goal of helping everyone be the best versions of
themselves, so I much prefer the latter scenario. In the former, there a
sharp cliff where people have no real idea how to improve past other
than this one outlier who we don't know how to replicate. This seems
like a missed opportunity, and I would like to figure out how we can use
instances of the former to produce the latter.

## Social Superpowers

At least some hypercompetence, especially with social skills, is learned
in response to suffering. The Ferret argues that ["superpowers" are
compensation for old
trauma](https://www.theferrett.com/2021/01/28/your-superpower-is-a-compensation-for-old-trauma/)
- if you're, for example, super attuned to other people's emotional
states, it might be because you grew up in an environment where you
needed to be hyperaware of people's emotional states to stay safe.

This seems obviously bad (although the competencies arrived at this way
are often good). It can be worth treating the superpower as somewhat
diagnostic of things to look at, but the superpower doesn't just go away
because you fix the underlying issue, you've still learned how to do it.
e.g. I'm very good at explaining things, this turns out to be partly due
to a somewhat inaccurate belief that if people are being mean to me and
I just explain myself really well they'll understand and stop being mean
to me. This works about as well as it sounds, but it appears to have
prompted some useful skill development.

Social superpowers are hard to learn because we're incredibly bad at
teaching social skills, to the point of not even trying. I suspect this
is a scenario where the solution to the problem starts with trying
literally anything at all.

## Why is genius bad so often?

I'm more interested in the sort of hypercompetence that might reasonably
be called "genius", which I think tends to arise out of some amount of
baseline ability, adequate resources to make use of it, and some sort of
overriding obsession.

(Of the three, I most clearly lack the obsession. I have a bit of an
internal debate as to whether this is missing the boat or dodging a
bullet, but I think for some of the reasons I discuss here my life is
the better for it. Which is not to say that I think I'd be a genius if I could be sufficiently obsessed, but I think I'm at least in with a chance)

Being vastly better at something you care about than people around you
who also care about that thing is very unpleasant. It triggers many of
the norms I described in [The social obligation to be bad at
things](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2020-02-29-10:30.html), and
it is the very definition of a [nice problem to
have](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2020-07-15-09:33.html),
isolating you from those around you who think they would love to have
your problems.

This is bad because being socially censured and/or isolated is bad for
people. It's also bad because it means they don't have peers they can
readily discuss their problems with to get a different perspective on it
- the run-of-the-mill experts can to some degree serve these functions,
but they can't really relate to the hypercompetent individual that well,
and in many ways are probably more resentful of them than your average
run of the mill citizen who didn't care that much about being good at
the thing in the first place.

The other reason why it is bad is that it indicates that the
hypercompetent individual is someone who chose to do it anyway, and
that's probably not a sign of a healthy person.

A useful heuristic is that, to the best of their abilities and
resources, people get the life they optimise for. A genius "could" have
chosen to just go hang out on the beach and drink margaritas, but that
is not the life they chose. Instead, they chose a life which
deliberately isolates them, because they have decided that they care far
more about their particular level of competency than they do connection
with other people.

More than this, they are so far past the typical level of those around
them that what happened is that they got to the point of social censure,
looked around them, and kept going because it was that important to
them.

I can, perhaps, imagine a healthy person rationally choosing to do that
given sufficient positive motivations to do this. If that's you, no
judgement. But for most people I don't think that's what's happening:
Instead they struggle to connect with others, and as a result they end
up (either deliberately or emotionally) concluding that they can't, and
so they set it aside.

I think what often happens here is something akin to the protective
mechanism I described in [Burnout as
Acedia](https://drmaciver.substack.com/p/burnout-as-acedia). People
learn that caring about social connection is not rewarded, and may be
punished, so they learn "not to" care about it.

## Postscript

I don't know why this particular piece got abandoned. It's been sitting in the drafts folder for too long. I suspect it's simply that I don't know how to answer the question, and so didn't know how to wrap it up.
