# What every programming tutorial gets wrong

Another piece of draft bankruptcy. This is my attempt to explain a common
failure mode of programming tutorials. I got quite far, but eventually
abandoned it.

## Scene setting

A while ago I was helping teach a coding workshop to a bunch of people
who had never coded before, and we were working through the written
materials which were very "Do this, then do that". Copy this code and
you should see this happen, etc.

At some point a student asked me "OK, but what is actually going on
here? What does any of this mean? I can follow the steps, but I have no
idea what is going on."

This was an incredibly reasonable question and I'm glad she asked it of
me, and that I could answer it, because I can't imagine that she would
have come away with any knowledge of programming without it.

I can't remember the specific thing we were talking about, but I think
the example was something like:

```pycon
>>> user = {}
>>> user["login"] = "Bob"
>>> user["login"]
"Bob"
>>> user["some other key"]
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
KeyError: 'some other key'
```

This is entirely clear if you're a programmer (especially if you're a
Python programmer, but it's sufficiently universal that probably most
programmers will have a pretty good idea of what's going on), but if
you've never programmed before it's just so much noise.

In response to this question I would have said something as follows:

The program you're using here is called the REPL(Read-Evaluate-Print-Loop,
but don't worry about that. It's pronounced
repple, like ripple with an eh). You're entering commands into it by writing statements in a
programming language called Python.

The interpreter keeps track of a number of "objects", which are a chunk
of data along with a particular set of commands that can you can use to
change that data, ask questions about it, etc. There are also commands
that let you interact with the computer more broadly (e.g. reading and
writing files) but we won't worry about them just yet in this tutorial.

Here what we're doing is creating an object, giving it the name *user*
that we can refer to it by, and issuing some commands and seeing what
happens.

Specifically, we are:

1.  Creating an object of a specific type called a *dictionary* and
    referring to it by the name *user*. The curly brackets `{}` create a
    new dictionary, and "`user =`" is where we declare that we will
    refer to it as *user*.

2.  A dictionary is an object whose job is to keep track of a table of
    information. It maps *keys* to *values*, which are just arbitrary
    things you can put into it, so that if you tell it to associate a
    value with particular key, and then later ask for the value
    associated with that key, you get the same thing back.

3.  Telling the dictionary we have just created (referred to by its
    name, *user*) that it should associate the value "Bob" with the key
    "login". "Bob" and "login" are objects of a type called *string*,
    which represents a piece of text.

4.  Looking up the key "login" and getting the expected value "Bob"
    back.

5.  Looking up the key "some other key" and getting an error that tells
    us that the dictionary has not yet been told to associate any values
    with that key.

This isn't a perfect answer, because I just made it up on the spot and
haven't tested it against students to see what questions they ask, but
it's probably pretty good. It certainly gives them more of a hook to
play around with dictionaries in the interpreter and see what happens,
and it gives them better questions to ask than "Help I don't understand
anything about what's going on".

## Theory, examples, and ability

I'm going to be using "theory", "examples", and "ability", in slightly
specific ways (which are possibly slightly idiosyncratic to me, although
I think compatible with normal use) in this issue, so I'll try to
explain what I mean by them.

An example is just any concrete version of the thing being taught. For
example, "do these steps in the REPL" above is an example. Showing
someone a program is an example. Showing someone a mathematical proof is
an example.

"Theory" is the knowledge that you need to answer questions like "What's
going on here?" and explain the behaviour of a particular example. For
example, in the above, you need some sort of theory to answer the
question "Why did typing `user["login"]` show `"Bob"` but typing
`user["some other key"]` showed an error message?"

"Ability" is the set of things the student can now do themselves. The
goal of teaching is to help the student expand their abilities. People
don't generally expand their abilities directly as the result of
teaching - you can only learn to do things by doing things - but
teaching points them in the right direction by giving them better ideas
of things to try. They still learn by trial and error, but teaching can
give them better things to try and help them understand their errors.

The goal of the above tutorial was to help them develop the ability to
write simple Python programs involving dictionaries, and to some degree
it succeeded. After going through this tutorial the student knows how to
launch the Python REPL, and has at least one example of something
reasonable to experiment with. Given a little bit of time to sit and
play with the REPL they might come up with a pretty reasonable theory
for explaining its behaviour.

Why do they need to develop that theory? Because theory gives them the
ability to *generalise*. If you have a theory that can explain why a
given action succeeded or failed, you now believe that any action that
matches that same explanation will also work or fail. This lets you try
out other things and see whether they confirm or deny your theory, which
is typically a much more productive model of trial and error than one
can manage without a theory of what's going on.

## Examples are vitally important

I should be clear: It is very good that the tutorial we were doing was
dumping people in the REPL and getting them to play around with it. This
is not my complaint, it's the correct thing to do. My complaint is that
the tutorial did not then contain anything like my answer above.

One of my pet peeves that has been coming out in places on the notebook
blog recently is that I hate people who introduce theory without
supporting examples in which to understand it. See e.g. [People are bad
at defining
things](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2021-07-02-09:29.html).

In particular it's often worth having examples *first* (this isn't
always possible), because then you can refer to concrete features of
them while introducing the theory. You saw a bit of that in how I
explained what was going on in the programming tutorial: I started with
an example, and then I highlighted specific features of it to ground the
theory (We're creating a thing called an object, it's a specific type
of object called a dictionary, then we're doing this to it, etc.)

The examples are particularly important. In order to understand a
theory, you need to be able to see how it applies to real concrete
things. Abstracting from concrete instances is literally the point of
theory, so without seeing how it relates to the things it abstracts
theory is just so many words.

On top of that, examples are often key to developing abilities. People
do not, generally speaking, reason from first principles from a theory.
If you read the literature on naturalised decision
making, what people
tend to do is [recognition-primed decision
making](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recognition_primed_decision). They
look at what's in front of them, they reason by analogy, thinking "Oh,
this looks like that thing I saw before, let me see what happens if I do
the same thing that I did there...". Having a rich and varied library of
examples is vitally important for this.

(I'd recommend Cedric Chin's [A Framework for Putting Mental Models into
Practice](https://commoncog.com/blog/a-framework-for-putting-mental-models-to-practice/),
but it's also worth reading Gary Klein's "Sources of Power" and maybe
some of his other work.)

## Theory helps you remember examples

Let's look at our example again:

```pycon
>>> user = {}
>>> user["login"] = "Bob"
>>> user["login"]
"Bob"
>>> user["some other key"]
Traceback (most recent call last):
   File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
KeyError: 'some other key' 
```

Do you think you could recreate this example from memory? I certainly
could, and I think most programmers could with only a little bit of
thought. It possibly wouldn't be character by character perfect, but you
could certainly get the right general idea.

Now consider the following highly readable example. Do you think you
could recreate *this* from memory?

```pycon
<<< d"T{ o Bm
<<< d"T{sn)gK[ena o n:g}n
<<< d"T{sn)gK[ena
n:g}n
<<< d"T{sn"gyT g](T{ tTuna
>{ilT}ilt kyg"] {TlTe] li)) )i"]'1
   ,[)T nE"]h[e<n= )[eT b= [e Eyghd)T<
FTuc{{g{1 r"gyT g](T{ tTur
```

If you haven't figured out the trick, this is the same example as above,
I've just jumbled all the letters through a mapping that replaces them
(e.g. \> gets replaced with \<).

Do you think you could recreate this example from memory? I sure
couldn't.

In some sense this contains exactly the same information as the
original, but because you're unable to easily turn it into a sensible
representation, it's much harder to remember and thus much harder to
understand. As well as the Python specific bits you also rely on e.g.
brackets matching, quotes matching, familiar understanding of the
meaning of the = symbol, the ability to clearly distinguish which bits
are identifiers because they're contained in quotes, etc.

When we know what's going on, we can describe the example as the
following sequence of steps:

1.  Create a dictionary called user.

2.  Insert the value "Bob" into "user" with the key "login"

3.  Look up the key "login" in "user" and get the result

4.  Look up the key "some other key" in "user" and see an error from
    looking up a missing key

This is a *high level representation* of what's going on. It describes
the steps we are taking, not the specific details that we know. This is
easy to remember, because it's a set of comprehensible steps.

Now, we're not expecting students to actually memorise specific
examples, but ability to memorise is a pretty good proxy for how well
the example fits in their head - if you can't easily remember what
should be a fairly simple example, that's a sign that there's too much
going for you to really figure it out and you're trying to learn too
much at once.

This sort of translation into a high level representation is what theory
does for you, and lets you organise your mental library of examples.

## Theory helps you generalise

As well as helping you remember examples you've seen before, theory lets
you *adapt* those previous examples to your needs.

This high level representation does a number of important things for us:

1.  It allows us to understand the meaning of the thing we are writing
    in terms of what we are trying to do rather than the literal
    characters on the screen.

2.  This makes it easier to remember because we can remember "Create a
    dictionary called user" separately from the literal syntax for
    creating a dictionary. We still have to remember both, but the
    latter is a fact we can more easily look up and will use often
    enough to remember.

3.  It lets us make predictions for what we would see if we changed the
    example.

## Doing (the right) things is the most important

This particularly shows up in the trial and error process of learning.
While you are still floundering around trying to figure things out, good
specific examples are especially important because you will lean hard
on emulating examples, so having good examples to emulate is crucial.

## Postscript

This is where I stalled. I'm not quite sure why. I think partly the
post was getting too long, and I didn't know how to continue, or
I ran out of energy.

It's a known problem that I'm very bad at revisiting things once
I've stopped writing them, and as a result I tend to fail to
finish longer pieces. I would like to work on that but have not
yet managed.
