# Abstraction and concretization

This is another draft bankruptcy post. It's the only section I actually wrote
from a longer piece called "opposing mental motions".

Abstraction is when you take something concrete and make it more
abstract. Dually, concretization is when you take something abstract and
make it concrete. You can also think of these as "Zooming out" and
"Zooming in", which also captures the feeling of them pretty well: As
you zoom out, you see more but can make out fewer relevant details. As
you zoom in, you can see the details clearly but lack the bigger
picture.

Abstraction is when you ask "What general principles is this an example
of?". Concretization is "What are some examples of this principle?".
When you abstract, you zoom out. When you reify,

This isn't just a single step. You can zoom out to more and more general
situations, or you can zoom in on more and more specific details.

For example, here's a zooming in series:

1.  Replacing complex systems from scratch is a fraught business.
2.  Often you discover that many of the specific features of the
    original system were much harder and less well understood than you
    thought they were (zooming in on the problem from "fraught
    business").
3.  For example in programming we've got the "second system effect",
    where second systems typically go
    badly and part
    of this is trying to recreate all sorts of tacit knowledge in the
    first system and maintaining bugwards compatibility with it for
    users' use case (This isn't the primary thing second system effect usually refers to, but it's still a thing that tends to happen in second systems).
4.  e.g. when Firefox replaced the original Mozilla web browser.
5.  A specific thing that happened in that development...

Concretization here is a gradual move from general claim to specific
illustrative anecdote.

Concretization can fail. For example I think it's reasonable to argue
that Firefox is not actually a good example of the general principle
(it's also reasonable to argue that it is), and that maybe even second
system effect isn't really a good concretization because it tends to be
more about the second system trying to do too much (I think it's both).
A concretizing move is not unambiguously correct, and tends to work to
precisely degree that the audience finds it illustrative of the general
point.

Abstraction is often tightly coupled with looking for an explanation for
specific behaviours and responses.

For a trivial example:

1.  I was watching Foundation. I hated it, it was super boring.
2.  Why did I hate it? Well because it was mediocre. It was very well
    executed, but there was nothing interesting about it.
3.  This is an instance of a general pattern where things tend to try to
    polish off their flaws without finding a real strength to emphasise,
    and I tend to hate that.

Like concretization, abstraction can fail if you try to move to a
general claim that isn't actually true, or that the concrete claim
didn't demonstrate well.

For example, I was talking about how I hate Rincewind the other day
(Rincewind is the protagonist of most of the early Discworld books. He's
the worst, and is the primary reason you should skip the early Discworld
books). I might have claimed that I hated Rincewind because he was a
protagonist who so clearly didn't want to be there and didn't want
anything to do with the events of the story. This claim doesn't hold up,
and you can see that it doesn't hold up by considering that Bilbo
Baggins (the protagonist of The Hobbit) also clearly doesn't want to be
there, but I like him just fine. If this were the correct explanation
for why I hate Rincewind, it would also work for Bilbo, so it cannot be
entirely correct.

(The actual reason I hate Rincewind is probably that he experiences no
growth or progress at any point. He starts contemptible, remains
contemptible, and at no point has any desires other than the return of
the status quo. The fact that he doesn't want to be there is *part* of
it, but it's more like a refusal to engage with his world)

Here you can use the two opposing motions to check that your move in one
direction is correct. You zoom out to the claim, then zoom back in to
another example of that claim to see whether it works in the same way as
the original. It doesn't, so the abstracting move must have been wrong.

You can also fact check in the other direction by going "You have
claimed that this concrete thing is an example of this principle, but is
it not in fact an example of this other principle?". e.g. the
counterarguments to my use of second-system effect as an example of the
complex systems thing have this form: They claim that second-systems go
wrong for different reasons.

In this way, the two conceptual motions provide a stabilising effect on
each other: The fact that we can move in one direction helps ensure that
we can move in the other direction safely, without the process getting
out of control or away from us.
