# Knowledge and justice

This was an abandoned attempt to introduce the ideas of *Epistemic Injustice* in
an accessible manner.

You should need approximately zero philosophy to
understand this, though I'll occasionally refer back to the relevant
philosophical terminology to connect it up.

## Credit

The idea of Epistemic Injustice comes from the philosopher Miranda
Fricker, who wrote [a book of the same name](https://amzn.to/2OB2HYH)
about it. My understanding of the subject has been heavily informed by
Kristie Dotson's "[A Cautionary Tale: On Limiting Epistemic
Oppression](https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5250/fronjwomestud.33.1.0024?seq=1)".
I'll also be drawing a little bit on Elizabeth Anderson's [Epistemic
Justice as a Virtue of Social
Institutions](https://philpapers.org/rec/ANDEJA) and Rittberg et. al's
[Epistemic Injustice in
Mathematics](http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/15133/1/Epistemic%20Injustice%20in%20Mathematics%20%28to%20appear%29.pdf).

Beyond that, I'll be synthesising a little bit with some broader themes.
I'll be drawing on some of the work of James C. Scott in [Seeing Like a
State](https://amzn.to/30ktRbu) and [Domination and the Arts of
Resistance](https://amzn.to/2DSR7py), and Jean-Francois Lyotard's [The
Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge](https://amzn.to/32vPDfj).
I'll also be drawing on some of CN Lester's book [Trans Like
Me](https://amzn.to/32zHUN8) for an example of epistemic injustice that
I've not seen discussed in the literature.

Because of this synthesis I won't necessarily be explaining any of this
in the terms that the authors would use, but I'll do my best to
highlight all the places we differ explicitly.

## Knowledge is Social

How do you know what you know?

This isn't a trick question. I'm not going to probe deep into the nature
of knowledge here. I mean it much more literally: You, presumably, know
things. How? Where did you learn them?

Well, mostly, you learned them from other people.

Some of it of course you will have learned through direct experience, or
figuring out on your own, but even that tends to blur in with the bits
you learned from other people - I know that I am typing this newsletter
on a laptop, and that is knowledge I have from direct experience, but
the fact that I know what "typing" is, or even "a laptop" is is
knowledge that, ultimately, came from someone else. Although the
*experience* is mine, the knowledge that allows me to interpret and
understand it is part of a shared canon that I have learned from and
with the people around me.

Don't get me wrong, a lot of my knowledge is of my own making: I'm
clever, I've figured things out. I'm sure you have too. But even for
people a lot cleverer than me it's a *lot* easier to figure things out
with others' help.

This help both with the knowledge that we have learned from them, and
with their direct help when we have a problem to solve that we need to
figure out. Knowledge isn't just collective in the sense that we learn
things from other people - we go to other people with our problems, talk
them out, explain them and solve them together. At the end of the
discussion changes are that *everyone* involved has learned something
about it, and you have a little more shared and common knowledge.

## What is Epistemic Injustice?

As with anything involving more than one person, this process of
constructing knowledge together can be done in ways that are unjust.
This is what Fricker calls *Epistemic Injustice* (Epistemic just means
"Concerning knowledge"): An injustice done to or by you in your capacity
as someone participating in the process of constructing knowledge
together.

Examples of epistemic injustices include:

-   Unjustly dismissing someone's testimony. e.g. "You would say that,
    you're a woman". By doing this you are refusing their contributions
    to the process of collective knowledge. Fricker calls this a
    *testimonial injustice*.

-   Unjustly denying someone the knowledge they need to solve their
    problems. e.g. Fricker cites the example of women needing the term
    "sexual harassment" to explain an aspect of their lived experience,
    and previously lacking it partly due to a prejudicial environment
    that prevented them from identifying it. Fricker calls this example
    a *hermeneutical injustice* but she means something slightly more
    specific than denial of knowledge.

-   Unjustly refusing to acquire (or acknowledge the validity of) the
    knowledge that allows you to engage properly with someone else's
    worldview. e.g. white people refusing to engage properly with people
    of colour's views on racism. Dotson calls this *contributory
    injustice* (though again means something slightly more specific).

-   Spreading lies about a particular subject (e.g. about trans people,
    their behaviour, their medical treatment) so that when people of a
    particular group try to tell the truth about their lives they are
    dismissed because "everybody knows" things that contradict that.
    (This is what CN Lester calls "The production of ignorance")

## What makes it injustice?

I tend to differ from a lot of the canon on some of the details of
epistemic injustice, and you're reading my newsletter so you're going to
get my view on the subject (sorry). Here I'll spell out some of those
differences.

For Fricker, Epistemic Injustice is tied to a very specific conception
of justice, and in order to count it has to be an injustice that is
specifically *identity prejudicial*: That is, it's done to you based on
some stable aspect of your identity (e.g. race, gender).

I tend not to insist on that for two reasons:

The first is that it ties you concepts of justice to whatever way you
happen to bucket people into categories. Unless you are *really*
confident that you understand the myriad ways in which humans can vary,
tying your notion of justice to your particular favoured labelling
scheme is itself prejudicial (I wrote about this a bit before in
[Legibility
Privileges](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2020-02-23-09:37.html)).

Fricker herself makes significant errors in the book as a result of this
- e.g. she has the example of treating someone as dishonest (and thus
discounting them as a source of knowledge) because they don't want to
make eye contact as *not* an example of an injustice because it's based
on an individual trait of e.g. shyness rather than their identity,
completely ignoring that it might be because they're autistic.

The second reason I tend to discount this view is that it's just weird
and obviously wrong. Although many injustices *are* identity prejudicial
in nature, by no means all are (e.g. you can do someone an injustice
just by behaving like an asshole to them when they've done nothing to
deserve it, just because you don't like them). It puts us in the
situation where something might be obviously epistemic in nature,
obviously an injustice, and yet not an epistemic injustice.

So if not identity prejudice, what makes something an epistemic
*injustice*.

Pass, sorry.

In all of my examples of epistemic injustice I just said "This thing
happens, and also it's unjust" and that's about the level of specificity
I'm willing to get into. I think trying to pin down when exactly
something is an epistemic injustice is a very hard problem and will
depend on your theory of and feelings about justice more broadly.

This is somewhere where Fricker's focus on identity prejudice based
injustices does a lot of work, because it allows her to focus on cases
where you can just say "Yeah obviously this is bad". e.g. Dismissing
someone's mathematical work because they're black is *obviously* an
injustice (unless you're really extremely racist), and you don't have to
do much work to justify this. Dismissing the same person's mathematical
work because they are telling you they have a one page proof of Fermat's
last theorem on the other hand is entirely justified because you'd do
exactly the same if they were white.

I assume you have your own conceptions of justice, and I do not plan to
solve the problem of justice in this newsletter issue (maybe a later
one...). Instead I think understanding epistemic injustice will come
down to understanding how things play out in the field of collective
knowledge, and then carrying over your normal beliefs about justice to
that field. What is distinct about epistemic injustice is not that it
requires its own notion of justice, but that it requires paying
attention to and understanding how we relate to knowledge.

## Different Types of Epistemic Injustice

Another way I differ from the canon is that I find this attempt to
pigeonhole epistemic injustices into different categories (testimonial,
hermeneutical, contributory...) *really* uninteresting. There are always
going to be more ways to do an injustice than we can conveniently label,
and having all these labels feels like an instance of [the Fallacy
Fallacy](https://notebook.lisamcnulty.co.uk/2020/05/28/the-fallacy-fallacy/)
- labelling something doesn't necessarily help you explain why it's bad,
and explaining why it's bad removes the need to label it.

## Postscript

I also had the following two section titles, completely empty:

* Understanding the Epistemic Playing Field
* Structural vs Individual Epistemic Harms

I'm not very surprised I abandoned this piece. I hate this type of summarisation work, not so much because it's unimportant as because I never know where to stop.
