# Why should we act according to reasons?

I'm currently doing a close read of J. David Velleman's excellent book "Self to Self". It is interesting, well argued, and built on foundations that I think are wrong in basically every way. This means that it is likely to be weak in areas where my worldview is strong, but also that it's likely to be strong in ways where my worldview is weak. As such it seems worth engaging with seriously. So I'm going to be writing posts in response to specific points in it.

This post is a response to his first chapter, "A Brief Introduction to Kantian Ethics" with a particular focus in the titular question: Why should we act according to reasons?

I want to first provide an account of Velleman's argument, then take apart what I think is a subtle but important error in it, and then build it back up in a way that I think, while weaker in its conclusions, retains many of its positive characteristics while resulting in something with a less Kantian flavour (You may recall I subscribe to a sort of [Kant lite](https://www.drmaciver.com/2019/09/being-an-example-to-others/) where you must take into account how your actions generalise, but this taking into account falls well short of Kant's universal categorical imperatives).

## Responding to Velleman

Here is, in a very brief summary, what I think of as a core feature of Velleman's argument (built on, but not identical to, Kant's arguments) that I want to engage with today.

Consider duties. A duty is a practical requirement, imposed by some authority (which could be an entity - such as the US government, God, your peers, etc - or could be an abstract principle such as upholding the truth, care for others, etc). Most duties are *escapable*, in the sense that they only exist to the degree that we acknowledge the validity of the authority. We may always ask "Why should I obey this authority?" as a means of escaping the duty - either the answer to this is a duty that does not derive from their authority, or we end up with a circularity where we must be obedient to the authority because we must be obedient to the authority. In order to figure out our absolute moral duties, we must find duties which are *inescapable*, in that they do not depend on an authority outside themselves for their validity. A source of such inescapable duties is implicit in the question "Why?" - we treat the answer to this as having some authority. We can thus ask "Why should reasons compel us to act?" (Velleman phrases this as "why should we act for reasons?" which is a subtly different in presentation but much stronger claim that I think his argument doesn't support) and the answer to this question is a reason, which cannot compel us to act unless reasons can always compel us to act. Thus asking "Why should reasons compel us to act?" is self-defeating.
We can still escape this requirement by not being compelled by reasons at all, but in the absence of that escape we must accept the authority of reasons as self-supporting.

This is perhaps a somewhat unfair summary of Velleman - I've done my best, but I'm genuinely unsure that I have successfully captured what he thinks is important - so here is the core of it from him directly:

> [...] any purported source of practical authority depends on reasons for obeying it – and hence on the authority of reasons. Suppose, then, that we attempted to question the authority of reasons themselves, as we earlier questioned other authorities. Where we previously asked “Why should I act on my desire?” let us now ask “Why should I act for reasons?” Shouldn’t this question open up a route of escape from all requirements?
>
> As soon as we ask why we should act for reasons, however, we can hear something odd in our question. To ask “Why should I?” is to demand a reason; and so to ask “Why should I act for reasons?” is to demand a reason for acting for reasons. This demand implicitly concedes the very authority that it purports to question – namely, the authority of reasons. Why would we demand a reason if we didn’t envision acting for it? If we really didn’t feel required to act for reasons, then a reason for doing so certainly wouldn’t help. So there is something self-defeating about asking for a reason to act for reasons.
>
> Yet the argument does more than close off one avenue of escape from the requirement to act for reasons. It shows that we are subject to this requirement if we are subject to any requirements at all. The require- ment to act for reasons is the fundamental requirement, from which the authority of all other requirements is derived, since the authority of other requirements just consists in there being reasons for us to obey them. There may be nothing that is required of us; but if anything is required of us, then acting for reasons is required.
>
> Hence the foregoing argument, though possibly unable to foreclose escape from the requirement to act for reasons, does succeed in raising the stakes. It shows that we cannot escape the requirement to act for reasons without escaping the force of requirements altogether. Either we think of ourselves as under the requirement to act for reasons, or we think of ourselves as under no requirements at all. And we cannot stand outside both ways of thinking and ask for reasons to enter into one or the other, since to ask for reasons is already to think of ourselves as subject to requirements.

I like this argument but think it's confused, and in the places where it is confused errors creep in in important ways.

The first source of its confusion is that it is operating under a very anemic notion of authority.

For example, why should I obey the laws of my country in cases where I think they are morally wrong? Let's say drugs. e.g. Suppose I am in a country where marijuana is illegal, a friend is suffering from something for which medical marijuana is a genuinely life-improving drug, and I can easily obtain it for them.
It is, in this circumstance, perfectly reasonable for me to ask "Why should I obey the authorities?" and to get the answer "Morally speaking, you shouldn't".
But the actual answer to the question is that the authorities have guns and a willingness to use them to enforce their laws.

Does this mean you shouldn't commit crimes? Well I am not a lawyer etc. etc. but also this is beside the point. The point is not what you *should* do, but that this authority is in a particular sense inescapable:
It doesn't matter whether you acknowledge it, you are still subject to the consequences it imposes.

This is what authority *does*. You don't obey authorities primarily because of nice tidy logical reasons for obedience, you obey authorities because they create consequences for your actions based on whether you obey them - they reward actions they regard as good, and punish actions they regard as bad. This is true even when the authority is more abstract and morality focused - e.g. you obey an authority because it causes you to think of yourself as good, or bad.

The counter to this is, of course, that these duties are still escapable. You can escape treating those duties as practical requirements by not caring about those consequences.

To which my counter is: OK. Try it.

The claim 

This brings me to my next objection to Velleman's account: I think "inescapable" is a bad criterion because it is much too strong. Many things are escapable in principle but not in practice. I can escape obedience to the authority by not caring about the fact that they will shoot me, but I can't actually do that because I don't want to be shot.


