# Showing people the door

Another draft bankruptcy post. I think this was abandoned for a fairly
common reason for me to abandon posts: I tried to write it because it
was important, but it's actually a fairly depressing subject for me to
write about and I didn't particularly want to write it.

_____________________________________________________________________

I run a small[^1] but fairly
successful discord server. [You can join if you want
to](https://discord.gg/bY5XKnWMQj). Nominally it's about this
newsletter, and occasionally we even remember that, but mostly it's just
a bunch of nerds who hang out on the internet, help each other navigate
life better, and talk about stuff we like. I think it's pretty great.

I act as the sole authority figure for how the community
works.[^2]. This is a space on
the internet I manage to cultivate the sort of community and
conversations I want to exist. It's what I've called [Living Room
Rules](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2020-07-14-13:42.html)
before - it's the equivalent of people coming around to my house to hang
out.

This doesn't mean the community do whatever I want. Truthfully, it's
like herding cats sometimes. But it does mean that when the community
isn't working, it's my responsibility to fix it. Often in consultation
with others, but ultimately I'm the one who makes the call.

The hardest part of this is that sometimes you have to show people the
door.

I had to do this with someone yesterday[^3]. He wasn't right for the community.

This is only the second time I've had to ask someone to leave this
discord (I've *banned* some people for outright terrible behaviour, but
that's different), but I've seen it with other communities in the past.
Crucially, I've seen it with other communities in the past because the
community leadership *didn't* ask the person to leave. This kills the
community.

One of the key things you are there for in a community - what *makes* it
a community - is the other people. A community is, at its core, a group
of people who do stuff together. Having someone who fails to gel with
the group and can't easily be avoided around disrupts that, because it
adds friction to every interaction.

What this means is that if some is disrupting the group's ability to
interact, there is less of the thing that brings people there, and some
people who were already marginal stop showing up so much. This in turn
means that the people who were there partly to hang out with those
people stop showing up so much, which in turn...

It's not a complete death spiral even in the worst case. Usually some
subset of the community stays - those who don't have any better options,
or who are still too attached to what the community used to be - but the
community turns into a shell of its former self.

More commonly, one person who doesn't mesh with the others isn't enough
to offset the rest of the benefits people are getting, but the community
contracts a bit and what's left feels slightly less thriving. If you add
more such people, it may get worse, .

Internet communities without a shared project are particularly
vulnerable to this, because there's *nothing* bringing people there
except the other people, so if you ruin those interactions you've got
nothing.

In contrast, communities built around something are a bit more robust.
e.g.

-   An open source project you have the motivation of the project
    itself - you're there because you want it for stuff. A sufficiently
    toxic contributor can definitely drive you off, and someone you
    don't get along with can definitely sap your motivation to
    contribute[^4], but you're at
    least there for some specific purpose external to the people
    involved.
-   Volunteer-driven physical projects (e.g. charitable works,
    maintenance of some space, etc) are the same but more so.
-   Communities built around access to some resource. e.g. you're
    probably not going to stop hanging out on the midjourney discord
    just because you don't like the people there, because that's where
    you go to use midjourney.
-   Physical communities with shared physical resources are even more
    like this. The people at your local maker space or tennis club might
    be super annoying, but if it's the only place you can go to get
    access to a laser cutter or a tennis court, you're still going to
    keep going.

These places still can be harmed by people who don't mesh well with the
group, and sometimes even outright ruined, but it's much harder and
they're more robust against it because of the additional draw to keep
coming back beyond just liking the people there.

## Who needs to leave?

Importantly, the person who I asked to leave wasn't an asshole. He was a
bit hard to deal with, but he didn't cross any lines where I could feel
good about just pressing the ban button. He just consistently failed to
mesh with the community in a way that made everyone else's experience
worse when he was in the room.

Frankly, he was probably just of an age where relatively few people
would fit in with the rest of us - we're mostly in our 30s, and he was
in his late teens or early 20s, and I think most people of that age
wouldn't have fit. Certainly I can't imagine a 19 year old version of me
doing well there. There's just too large an experience gap.

This sort of thing is, in general, the problem zone: People who have not
and probably never will do anything that lets you go "Right, you've
crossed a line" and kick them out, but you really wish they would.

When you start feeling that way about someone, you probably need to think
seriously about asking them to leave. If you don't, people you want in the
community much more will leave on their own instead.

# Afterword

I tapered out there partially because I don't really have good advice on
how to navigate this. This is hard, and I've not got more than a handful
of personal examples of doing it, and I'm not confident that I handled it
especially well, or that I know what handling it well looks like in full
generality.

All I know is that I've seen communities die by not doing this, and it's
a problem that needs solving

[^1]: Officially we're about 400 people, with a regulars list of about 100 people, of whom maybe half are regularly active.

[^2]: It's not a cult, I promise.

[^3]: Possibly he's reading this. If so, sorry. Editor's note: Presumably not on the notebook. Also this "yesterday" was actually more than a year ago.

[^4]: Open source is pretty good at doing this on its own, honestly.
