# Defining definition

Another abandoned draft, this one dredged up from an old Google doc.
It was meant to be part of a longer book-length project but I lost steam,
because that's what happens when I undertake longer book-length projects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When we use a word, we might know exactly what we mean by it, but unless
other people know what we mean by it our use of it isn't very useful. If
I wrote a long essay about the strengths and weaknesses of incorporating
scamprooft[^1] into our florbnoggle practices, this would not be very
helpful to a reader that doesn't know what scamprooft is and hasn't ever
practised florbnoggle in their life.[^2] We can solve this problem by
giving people *definitions* of concepts we are using that they might not
be familiar with, in order to help them understand what we mean by them.

A definition, informally, is an explanation of what some concept
(usually labelled with a word or a phrase) means. That is, it tells you
how to apply the concept.[^3]

The key thing that a definition lets you do is understand when some item
fits the concept. This provides you with *conditions* (things you can
check) that allow you to tell whether something is an instance of that
concept or not. That is, a definition is supposed to communicate to you
some sort of decision procedure that you can use to check whether the
concept applies in a given instance.

Most definitions we use in practice are in some sense incomplete - there
will be some things that the definition gives you a clear yes to, some
that it gives you a clear no to, and a large class of states (often, but
not always, somewhere between the two) where it doesn't give you a clear
answer. Sometimes that's a limitation of the definition and a better
definition would decide between them, sometimes it's just that the
precise boundary is just genuinely fuzzy.

Additionally, some things are just extremely hard to define without
introducing some sort of circularity or non-linguistic explanation. We
explain the colour "red" by pointing to red things until you get the
pattern.

Defining things perfectly is hard to impossible, and often even
undesirable, but some amount of definition is necessary if we're to be
able to communicate at all. This chapter is about how to use definitions
well, and to do that we're going to have to dig in to what a definition
actually does, and how to take advantage of definition's strengths while
compensating for its weaknesses.

## Necessary and sufficient conditions

The *ideal* of a definition is the sort of definition you would see in
mathematics, which takes some concept and provides strict necessary and
sufficient rules for when it applies. For example: a square is a shape
with four straight sides, all of equal lengths, and each corner having
the same angle.

What it means to say that these are *necessary* conditions is that if
something doesn't satisfy all of them it is not a square. For example,
an equilateral triangle is a shape with three straight sides, all of
equal lengths, and each corner having the same angle. You can tell that
it's not a square because it fails the condition of having four straight
sides even though it satisfies all the others.

What it means to say that these are *sufficient* conditions is that if
something satisfies all of them it's definitely a square. There's no
possibility of saying "Oh whoops I forget that there's a secret extra
requirement", these conditions lay out what it means to be a square and
anything that satisfies them is one. We will often write sufficient
conditions as an "if" statement. e.g. "A shape is a square if...".

To look it another way: A necessary condition is something you can check
in order to show that an item of interest *isn't* the thing. A
sufficient condition tells you something you can check to show that an
item of interest *is* the thing. We will often write necessary
conditions as an "only if" statement. e.g. "A shape is a square only
if...".

Having a set of conditions which is both necessary and sufficient is
very convenient because it gives you a precise

It's possible to have sets of conditions that are necessary but not
sufficient.

For example, you *weaken* a set of necessary conditions by removing
parts and they'll still be necessary, so e.g. "a shape with four sides
of equal lengths" is a condition that is necessary for being a square
(every square has four sides with equal lengths) but not sufficient
because e.g. a rhombus (a square which has been skewed so that all sides
have equal lengths but some corners are pointier than others) satisfies
these but is not a square.

Similarly you can *strengthen* a set of sufficient conditions and still
have a set of sufficient conditions. e.g. Anything satisfying "a shape
with four sides of length one and all angles equal" is a square, but a
square with sides of length two does not satisfy these conditions so
they are not necessary.

Generally with non-mathematical objects we're not so lucky as to have
simple necessary and sufficient conditions. Those that are tend to refer
to human-constructed concepts that are built as having necessary and
sufficient conditions deliberately. e.g. legal concepts tend to come
with a very explicit decision procedure for determining that they apply.
You're "officially married in the country of X"[^4] if you're officially
recorded as married in X or by some country whose marriages are
recognised by X (and if your marriage is of a type that is recognised by
as permissible by X due to e.g. constraints on gender).[^5]

For things that are more about describing things that actually exist in
the physical world, what you tend to find is that it's easy to provide
sufficient conditions and it's easy to provide necessary conditions, but
there's a large gap in the middle. e.g. the sorites paradox (how many
grains of sand count as a heap?) can be thought of as being about this
gap: It's easy to provide a sufficient condition (e.g. if you've got
between one and two million grains in a pile, that counts as a heap),
it's easy to provide a necessary condition (e.g. you need more than one
grain to count as a heap), but somewhere in the middle the question gets
hard to resolve. You'll have this problem with most continuous
quantities - how tall do you have to be before you count as tall? How
old do you have to be before you count as elderly? There isn't a clear
boundary, but it's easy to create necessary conditions and easy to
create sufficient conditions, it's just not easy to create conditions
that are both.

Running into problems like this is often what stops people coming up
with good definitions for things: They are aiming for a mathematical
style set of necessary-and-sufficient conditions, this doesn't work, and
then they give up on the whole thing as indefinable.

In fact, definitions are perfectly possible for real-world concepts. We
have to give up on them being as nice as mathematical definitions, but
we can still use them to provide people with helpful handles on what we
mean, and it starts by recognising that we're often going to want to
provide separate necessary conditions and sufficient conditions, and
we'll almost always have ambiguous edge cases that any definition we
provide won't cover. This doesn't stop them being useful.

For example, a necessary condition for being a definition is that it is
an attempt to explain what a term means using language. This is not a
sufficient condition (e.g. talking about the history of the use of a
term satisfies this condition but is not really a definition).

A sufficient condition for something being a definition is that it has
the form "A (term) is a (thing) which...". This gives you something very
like the mathematical type of definition, and you can sure that
something that looks like this is, or at least can function as, a
definition.

Much of the interesting work of defining things lies between the regions
set by these two conditions.

## Ostensive Definition

One useful way of defining things is by *ostensive definition,* which
means roughly "definition by showing". Classically, you point out a
bunch of examples and define your term as meaning "this sort of thing".
When you see it in writing it will often look like "By this term, I mean
things like..."

Ostensive definition as defined this way is bad and I don't like it, but
the thing that it is trying to point to is good, so I'm going to
shamelessly redefine the term (in a way that includes the original
usage) as meaning a definition which uses examples in some essential way
(i.e. not just as illustrations of some point).

The limitation of definition by just pointing at examples is this: You
can think of an example of a concept as being an *extremely* specific
sufficient condition, and you need at least some sort of necessary
condition preventing you from generalising that condition too far. "You
see this thing? It's a cat." gives you a sufficient definition for being
a cat, but it doesn't tell you what else is a cat. It would be perfectly
reasonable from this one example to assume that cat meant, for example,
animal, and start calling dogs cats as well.[^6] At the bare minimum,
defining things ostensively requires you to point at both examples of
the concept and non-examples of the concept.

In theory, you can define anything you like ostensively as long as
you're able to interact with the recipient. You give them a bunch of
examples, and then they point at more examples and you say whether they
are or aren't an instance of the thing.

In practice, most of the time, this doesn't work very well. Both because
you're not necessarily getting to interact with the people you're
defining things for (e.g. if you're writing it down), and also it's very
slow because it can take a very long time for them to figure out the
right decision procedure for the concept.

The problem is that people are not necessarily generalising in the way
that you want them to. If you show them a bunch of examples and they
come up with a rule for distinguishing them, there can be many rules
that work.This means that they will consistently have errors in their
understanding of the concept.

Worse, often you won't even be able to *tell* what those errors are,
because either they're in important but rare edge cases, or the
back-and-forth testing has blind spots because they're looking for
examples that confirm their theory[^7], and you don't understand what
the examples you need to show their theory is wrong are because you
don't know what their theory is.

You can solve, or at least mitigate this, by giving each of your
examples a generalisation - in the case of a positive example (an
example where the concept holds), a sufficient condition that that
example satisfies that makes it an instance of the concept, and in the
case of a negative example (an example where the concept doesn't hold) a
necessary condition it fails to satisfy.

For example, I've given you a couple of examples of definitions, but I
haven't given you examples of things that *aren't* definitions.

Here's an easy example of something that isn't a definition: A cat. You
can tell it's not a definition because it's not a use of language, it's
a cat. A necessary condition for being a definition is that it involves
some degree of use of language (even if it's just to say "This is an X"
when pointing at an X).[^8]

Here's a more interesting example of something that is not a definition:

> Priests are identifiable by their consistent attire and groomed
> appearance. When not occupied with their official duties, they can be
> spotted around town engaged in leisurely activities. They reside in
> modest accommodations among the public. Priests dedicate time to
> advancing their knowledge and serving the community. They make
> themselves available to offer guidance. Though often solitary, priests
> derive purpose from their vocation. During infrequent breaks, they
> partake in simple enjoyments.

This is a *description,* not a definition. It tells you what priests
*are like*[^9], not what a priest *is*. This may be useful information
about priests and how to spot one, but it doesn't tell you anything
about what makes someone a priest, or really even how to tell if they
are a priest.

Using examples like this is an important part of doing ostensive
definition well: If you only pick examples that are far from the
boundary between being instances of the concept and not being instances,
you don't help people really learn how to make the decision in the cases
where it's difficult.

Another thing that can be helpful is to provide examples where it's
genuinely ambiguous as to whether it's an instance of the concept, or at
least it's not a very good instance. For example, here's an alternative
paragraph about priests:

> [Priests are people who wear special clothes and live in churches.
> They spend a lot of time reading old books and talking to people about
> being nice. Priests tell stories to children and sometimes help people
> when they are sad.]{.mark}

[Is this a definition? I *guess*? It tells you just enough about what a
priest is and what they're for that I suppose I'd count it as a
definition. But it's not one I'd be particularly happy with
giving.]{.mark}

[This sort of ostensive definition is often useful to provide even if
you're providing a more direct sort of definition, because it greatly
helps the reader understand how the definition works to have examples
and illustrations of how they fit into the definition.]{.mark}

## Working definitions

There's one small defect with this view of definitions in terms of
necessary and sufficient conditions: It's wrong. Or, at least, it's very
limiting - it fails to cover many definitions that exist in practice and
serve a useful functional process.

A nice example of this is from Bernard Suits's book "The Grasshopper",
which is about philosophy of games. He offers two definitions of a game.
The first is:

> To play a game is to attempt to achieve a specific state of affairs
> \[prelusory goal\], using only means permitted by rules \[lusory
> means\], where the rules prohibit use of more efficient in favour of
> less efficient means \[constitutive rules\], and where the rules are
> accepted just because they make possible such activity \[lusory
> attitude\].

He then offers the following "portable" definition:

> a voluntary attempt to overcome unnecessary obstacles

These do not define the same concept - satisfying either of them is
neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for satisfying the other.

For example, suppose you're going somewhere and you decide to take the
long way around just to add some variety. You discover there's a road
blocked for maintenance. You could backtrack, but you're feeling
stubborn, so you instead try to find your way around the road block.

This is a voluntary (you're doing it for no other reason that you feel
like it) attempt to overcome an unnecessary (you could always backtrack)
obstacle. It's not a game in the full sense that Suits defines it,
because it lacks constitutive rules. The thing that is stopping you from
backtracking is not that it would be a rules violation, it's that you're
feeling stubborn.

You could argue that there *are* constitutive rules that you're making
up on the fly, but I think that's cheating and requires diluting the
meaning of "rules" too much.[^10] This is particularly true because I
think what happens when you violate these putative rules is different
than what happens if you violate the rules of a game.

An example from C Thi Nguyen's account of games is mountain climbing:
There you have the prelusory goal of getting to the top of the mountain,
and a set of constitutive rules about how to do it (you have to climb
the mountain). You could achieve the goal of getting to the top of the
mountain by travelling there in a helicopter. You would still have
achieved the goal, but in violating the rules you are *not doing
mountain climbing*. In contrast, in our detour example it's not that
you've failed to do something well-defined. There's no game of "take the
long way around" that you're now not playing. It's just not what you
want to do.

In the other direction, suppose someone threatens to kill you unless you
beat them at chess. Your playing of this game of chess is in no way
voluntary, but you're still playing a game in the full definition.

So, in the strictly idealised mathematical sense of definitions as
providing necessary and sufficient conditions, these aren't the same
definition, they're barely even related. And yet, it sure seems like
Suits's portable definition adds something to your understanding of the
meaning of games on top of the full definition.

Part of what it adds is *convenience* - the full definition of games is
somewhat unwieldy, and introduces many other terms as part of its
definition. It's strictly a better definition in terms of giving you the
full concept in detail and making it easier to analyse something in
terms of Suits's conception of a game, but it's hard to get much of an
intuitive sense of.

In contrast "a voluntary attempt to overcome unnecessary obstacles" is
pretty intuitively comprehensible and it is easy to see its gamelike
structure.

[^1]: These are of course all completely made up words.

[^2]: Of course, such a reader probably won't benefit from reading such
    an essay in most circumstances, but they might if you can adequately
    communicate them that florbnoggling is basically the same as
    bungipopping, a practice they are quite familiar with, except you
    zeft when in bungipopping you would smork.

[^3]: "Definition" is used in a variety of other related ways. For
    example, you can "define the problem", you can "define the terms of
    an agreement" etc. When I talk about definitions in this chapter, I
    don't mean those senses, I mean specifically defining the meaning of
    some term.

[^4]: Normally one would just say "married" here, but this blurs
    multiple related but distinct concepts together, and also elides
    historical marriages from before state records begin.

[^5]: It's almost certainly more complicated than this. I am not a
    lawyer.

[^6]: This isn't pedantry! It's an actual problem in language
    acquisition, both first language and foreign languages.

[^7]: There's a classic experiment called the Wason reflection task
    which asks you which cards you need to turn over to see if a rule is
    satisfied. People very regularly fail to turn over the cards that
    they would need to determine that the rule *isn't* satisfied. For
    example, given the rule "if a card shows an even number on one face,
    then its opposite face is blue", you need to turn over red cards and
    even cards, but instead people turn over blue cards, which can
    provide no information. People don't tend to show this error in
    subjects with which they're familiar, but they do show it with
    subjects with which they're not, which is exactly the situation you
    find yourself in when learning a new concept.

[^8]: "Is a cat an instance of this concept?" is a surprisingly good
    starting point in general, because it forces you to define the
    boundaries of what sort of thing this concept applies to.

[^9]: At least stereotypically. Very few of these things are universally
    true of priests of course.

[^10]: I think a better argument would be that Suits is putting too much
    emphasis on "rules" and that the things that constitute a game may
    not be rules in any sort of formal sense, and any sort of taking on
    a restriction to achieve an activity that is constituted by that
    restriction is at least somewhat gamelike. Under this view, this
    example is a game but not a "Suitsian game" to use Nguyen's term for
    it.
