# Some Philosophy of Mathematics

This is another draft bankruptcy piece, pulled out of a random Google doc.
I think what I've got here is perfectly reasonable but it was an overly
ambitious project that I lost interest in finishing.

It's also my first attempt at moving my blog rendering over to pandoc,
so probably a whole bunch of things will break.

I'm going to be making a few sweeping generalisations about philosophy
of mathematics. I'm sure some of them don't hold in complete generality.
I'm trying to convey the sense of what mathematics[^1] is typically
like rather than attempting to come up with a grand unifying theory of
mathematical practice.

This piece comes out of trying to explain a bit about mathematical
incompleteness to a philosopher and realising that the core problem in
explaining this is that the way we typically[^2] present axioms
philosophically is unhelpful for understanding what's going on in
mathematics.

So, let's fix this.

## What are axioms?

Axioms are things that we take to be true, but they are things we take
to be true in the sense that "a bachelor is an unmarried man" or "a
bishop moves any number of vacant squares diagonally". They are not
taken to be true in the sense that they represent deep truths about the
universe that we have no way to prove but wholeheartedly believe[^3],
they are taken to be true in the sense that they represent defining
properties of the class of thing we are interested in talking about.

For this to make sense, we need to realise that mathematics isn't really
about proofs, it's about *things, *"mathematical objects". Proofs are
for discovering properties of mathematical objects. They say: "Suppose
I've got some object and it has these properties. What else do I know
about it?". Those properties are the axioms, but you're not "assuming"
that the object has those properties in the sense that they are things
that might be false but you're postulating for now, those properties
define the class of object that you are interested in talking about.

In contrast, most people think of axioms as things that are "self
evidently true" or, slightly more accurately, "assumptions", but this
immediately invites the question "But what if your assumptions are
wrong?" or "How do you *know* your axioms are true?"[^4]. With axioms
as picking out objects of interest, these problems go away - you can
argue about whether the objects in question are interesting or whether
any examples of them exist ("exist" is complicated. More on that later),
but not whether the axioms are true.

One of the easiest places to see how this works is with the mathematics
of games, because there the axioms are just the *constitutive rules* of
the game. You can do mathematics around games of chess (e.g. "From this
position, can checkmate be forced in 5 moves?" is implicitly a
mathematical sort of question), and in asking this question you are
restricted to the sort of moves that chess allows. If you were playing
with a different rule set, the conclusion might be different, but that
doesn't mean that the two conclusions are incompatible, they're just
about different games.

Another, more historical, example is the parallel postulate and the
axioms of geometry. Simplified version: Euclid came up with a set of
axioms for geometry, describing how points, lines, and circles worked.
There were a bunch of perfectly sensible axioms, and then there was the
rather awkward[
](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_postulate)[*Parallel
Postulate*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_postulate):[^5]

> In a plane, given a line and a point not on it, at most one line
> parallel to the given line can be drawn through the point.

People spent ages trying to prove the parallel postulate from the other
axioms, and then someone pointed out that[
](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spherical_geometry)[Spherical
Geometry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spherical_geometry)
demonstrated that you couldn't do this: If you take a sphere and
interpret "line" as meaning "great circle" (a circle on the surface of
the sphere whose centre is the centre of the sphere. e.g the equator, or
a line of longitude, but not in general a line of latitude because those
are "off centre" for the sphere), you get something that satisfies all
the basic axioms of geometry but for which the parallel postulate is
false (because there are no parallel lines, because all great circles
intersect at two points on the sphere).

If you think of geometry as trying to derive universal truths of
geometry, this information can be very distressing. How do you know
which axioms to use?

If, on the other hand, you instead think of there being such a thing as
*a geometry* then all you're trying to do is figure out properties of
particular geometries of interest, and you can pick whichever one you
want to work on. Sometimes you might want to work with a Euclidean
geometry, sometimes you might want to work with a spherical geometry.
It's up to you! They're both equally valid mathematical objects for
doing geometry on.

## What are mathematical objects?

If axioms pick out which mathematical objects we are talking about, we
need to follow this by answering a much harder question: What are
mathematical objects?

I need to start with a slightly slippery mathematician's definition:
Mathematical objects are the things you can do proofs about.

This definition is actually quite useful, because it highlights an
important point of this conception of axioms: It's actually slightly
agnostic to foundational questions like this. As long as there is
something called a mathematical object and you can do proofs about it,
this notion of axiom is useful.

In particular, consider two[^6] conceptions of mathematical
foundations:

1.  Mathematics is reasoning about real entities that exist in some sort
    > of abstract platonic realm of ideal forms (**Mathematical
    > platonism**)

2.  Mathematics is a purely formal game of manipulating symbols
    > representing purely formal entities according to agreed upon
    > rules, which can be put in correspondence with real entities but
    > do not intrinsically correspond to things that "exist".
    > (**Mathematical formalism**)

Mathematicians often behave liked platonists but fall back on formalism
as a sort of philosophical justification.

A third competing view that I like is Reuben Hersch's definition of
mathematical objects as "socio-historical objects". Things that only
exist because we, as people doing mathematics, agree they exist,
similarly to other things like money, rules, games.

I think this is mostly right, but I'd like to propose a slight
refinement: Mathematical objects are things that we agree to *behave as
if they existed* because doing so allows us to do mathematics, and
mathematics is useful.

I think this makes sense of why, regardless of what they believe about
foundations, mathematicians in practice behave more like platonists:
Regardless of whether mathematical objects "actually exist", mathematics
is done by behaving *as if* mathematical objects exist, and proceeding
from that starting point to reason about what they should be like.[^7]

I sometimes joke that the formalists are right that mathematics is a
game, but it's not a purely symbolic one, it's an RPG set in the
Platonic realm. We are reasoning about some world that we agree to
behave as if it existed, contained certain objects, and was subject to
logical reasoning of the sort that we would expect to hold in the real
world.[^8]

This still leaves us to ask: What sort of mathematical objects do we
posit exist? Fictional worlds are very different depending on the world
building you've done for them.

Generally mathematical objects are one of two types:

1.  Something we've built as an abstracted and generalised version of
    something in the physical world.

2.  Something we've built out of other mathematical objects.

Often it's both: When we build mathematical objects, we're usually doing
them for some purpose, and that purpose is often to represent something
that in some way looks like the real world. This helps us avoid positing
too many "primitive" mathematical objects - the building blocks of our
mathematical world[^9].

The classic example of something which is purely built as an abstracted
and generalised version of something in the physical world is a natural
(counting) number. The numbers 0, 1, 2, ... are mathematical objects
that we just assume exist[^10] in our mathematical world, according to
the following rules for constructing them:

1.  There is a number 0.

2.  If there is a number n, there is a next number immediately after it
    (n + 1, although we want to do this before we've defined addition
    so this is usually written S(n), for successor of n).

We then agree that these mathematical objects satisfy what we think of
as the idealised rules of counting numbers.

These counting numbers are abstract in the following sense: There is no
way to point to the number four. You can point to four rocks, four
caling birds, four tally marks. You can point to the arabic number 4, or
the roman numeral IV. These all in some sense "represent" the number
four (as does the word "four"), but they are not the mathematical object
four, they are a real object that in some sense has fourness.

These counting numbers are also generalised, in that we posit the
existence of mathematical numbers that have no corresponding real world
counted quantity. Why? Well, it follows from the rules we have for
counting numbers (which I haven't spelled out, but it does I promise)
that if n exists then so does 10n. But that means that 10 exists, 100
exists, 1,000,000 exists... 10^10000000000\ ^also exists, which is
vastly more things to count than there are atoms in the universe. In the
real world, you can't count that high. In the mathematical world, no
problem at all.[^11]

Another, more concrete, example of a mathematical object that allows us
to avoid concerns about infinity[^12] is the mathematical objects
corresponding to *game states*.

Consider a game of chess, with the pieces on the board somewhere.
Suppose you nudge a piece slightly, keeping it in the same square but
just shifting it slightly to the left. In one sense, you've changed the
state of the board - a piece is in a different location. But, from the
point of view of a game of chess, you have not made a change[^13],
because all that matters is which square the piece is in, not exactly
where it is.

Similarly, if you were to take another chess board and set and place the
pieces from that set in the same squares as they were in the original
board, this would represent the same game of chess. This is true even if
one board is physical and the other electronic. You could even copy the
chess board position onto paper by hand - either as a picture, or as a
list of positions in a standard chess notation. These would all
represent the same game of chess.

Although chess is a game whose state is represented by physical objects
(which might be a physical chess board, might be a computer, might even
be solely in the heads of the participants!), chess is played as the
*abstract game state *- all that matters is the chess position, which is
represented by the physical object but not synonymous with it.

One important feature of this is that not all physical arrangements of a
chess board have a corresponding abstract chess state. e.g. you could
have a piece halfway between two squares. You could have a board with no
kings. These are not valid chess states, they're just things you can do
with the physical chess board.

Similarly, you've got the rules of chess which describe how abstract
chess states are transformed into each other. Nothing stops you
physically violating these rules - you can pick someone's king up and
throw it across the room, you can steal their pawn while they're not
looking, nothing stops you from doing these things, except the fact that
in doing them you are no longer playing chess. The rules of chess exist
precisely in order to enable you to play chess, and violating the rules
means that this is not a game of chess.[^14]

These abstract chess states and the rules for moving between them are
mathematical objects that exist in the same sort of "mathematical realm"
as numbers. You can also do mathematics to them.

For example, the question "Is a checkmate guaranteed for white from this
position?" is a mathematical question. You are trying to reason about
whether white has a strategy that guarantees that all series of moves
from the current chess position result in a checkmate for white.

Although this mathematical question nominally answers a question about
real games of chess being played by the players, it differs in several
ways:

1.  It doesn't describe anything about the game other than the abstract
    states - you don't know how the players physically move around the
    board, their emotional states, etc. None of these are considered
    relevant to or part of the mathematics.

2.  It has the same sort of unboundedness problem that counting numbers
    do. This question actually does have a definite answer, but the
    definite answer might require considering 2^2048\ ^different chess
    positions to reach.[^15] While in theory this is a finite number
    with a definite answer, there's no guarantee we can calculate it.

## Detritus

Editor's note: This was a section with random cuttings that had been removed
from the text elsewhere because it didn't fit the flow.

One of the most important features of this explanation is that it makes
much more sense of the social role of axioms. If axioms are universal
truths then they arrive through some sort of deep a priori knowledge or
divine revelation or something, but if axioms just pick out the objects
you're talking about they arrive in a much more straightforward way:
Someone picks up a mathematical object and goes "Hey, look at this
thing! Interesting, innit?" and then proceeds to try to describe what's
interesting about it.

You have to do a bit of fiddling around to figure out which properties
of the object you do and don't care about, and what a good set of axioms
to represent them are, but that's just work, it's not anything
particularly mysterious you just have to come up with a good design.
Once you've identified an object, or some objects, of interest, you can
just axiomatise them.

This helpfully reduces the question "Where do axioms come from?" to the
much harder question "Where do mathematical objects come from?", which
in turn first requires us to

I think there are roughly two sources for mathematical objects:

1.  We make them out of other mathematical objects.

2.  We abstract them from real things (which may be physical objects,
    properties of such objects, processes, etc).

We can do the first because (I have no idea how I was intending to continue this sentence).

## Reflections

I often find that there's a large body of understanding that lives in my head and that
I think is more sensible than how other people seem to view it, but when it comes time to
try to explain it I find it's all too interconnected to be worth the effort
of explaining unless there's some really clear goal to it. This was one of those times.

I'd like a solution to this problem, but I'm not sure there is a solution other than to
accept my own mortality and finite energy reserves and not worry so much about
other people being wrong.

[^1]:  Especially modernish mathematics. I think most of what I'm saying
    works as a description of historical mathematics, but it certainly
    wouldn't have been the way people thought about it prior to some
    time in the 20th century.

[^2]:  I don't know how reliable my sense of how we typically present
    axioms is and was worried this might be a[
    ](https://www.lisamcnulty.co.uk/essays/phantom-opinions)[*phantom
    opinion*](https://www.lisamcnulty.co.uk/essays/phantom-opinions), so
    I checked and it's not. I did some casual googling, checked
    Wikipedia, and asked ChatGPT which is usually a pretty good
    representation of the sort of the typical but oversimplified vox
    populi opinion on things. I also[
    ](https://twitter.com/DRMacIver/status/1713814331224170566)[*did
    some polling on
    Twitter*](https://twitter.com/DRMacIver/status/1713814331224170566)
    and I think most of the answers are confusing in the relevant way. I
    think that my view is probably relatively typical among working
    mathematicians, but not of how we talk about mathematics to
    non-mathematicians.

[^3]:  This is one potential source of axioms of course, as the universe
    is one of the things we want to reason about, but it is not what
    axioms *are*.

[^4]:  These questions are not meaningless or bad necessarily, but
    they're usually asked in the wrong place.

[^5]:  Note: This is all somewhat ahistorical and simplified for
    illustrative purposes. Euclid's account of geometry wasn't fully
    axiomatic, and the version of the parallel postulate stated is not
    Euclid's original and is only equivalent to it given the other
    axioms.

[^6]:  Slightly strawman versions of these positions, but I think
    morally accurate.

[^7]:  In this view, mathematics is a ritual practice in the sense of
    Seligman et al's "Ritual and its Consequences". It is the creation
    of a *subjunctive world* in which certain rules and claims are
    treated as inviolable properties of the ritual space, because doing
    so allows the ritual to occur, which is desirable for its non-ritual
    consequences. e.g. politeness norms are viewed as a ritual in this
    sense, because maintaining them allows for civil interactions which
    everyone enjoys. In practice they are not inviolable, but if
    everyone treats them as such they are not violated and thus you get
    to operate in a world where you can trust them as if they were
    inviolable.

[^8]:  This is a nontrivial constraint on a hypothetical world. e.g.
    fairy tales have a logic of their own, but it is not a simple if A
    then B sort of logical reasoning you can count on. The realm in
    which mathematical objects exist is posited to be one that makes
    sense.

[^9]:  Which we want to do because every primitive mathematical object
    is a sort of leap of faith as to whether the rules actually make
    sense.

[^10]:  In fact, in modern (i.e. dating from the early 20th century) we
    construct these too out of other mathematical objects - sets - but
    you can do the mathematics of numbers without doing the mathematics
    of sets, and numbers are in some sense "more basic" to mathematics.

[^11]:  And there are sometimes reasons to, even if you only care about
    real world countable quantities! Sometimes you want to prove a
    mathematical result and it requires you to e.g. look at all the
    subsets of some set of a reasonable size. Although 1,000,000 is a
    perfectly reasonable number, 21,000,000 is again more than the atoms
    of the universe. From a mathematical point of view, proving results
    that use that number are completely legitimate, even if it has no
    physical analogue.

[^12]:  And concern ourselves with the merely very large.

[^13]:  In tournament rules you may have committed yourself to moving
    this piece, but the point remains: If you moved this piece to that
    square prior to nudging it, that makes no difference.

[^14]:  Some games do explicitly allow cheating as part of the game, but
    that doesn't change the basic point, it's just a more complicated
    ruleset.

[^15]:  Actually much less than that, because not all of those chess
    positions are in fact possible, but even a 100-order of magnitude
    reduction makes this an impossibly large number of states.
