# Things I believe about ethics and personal development

This isn't exactly an abandoned draft, in that it's more or less complete
as it is, but it's pulled out of an old Google doc and I wanted it to be
somewhere more permanent and visible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is a core to my self-work that I struggle to articulate and that
end up mostly showing up as empty space that I write around. I'd like to
articulate these, with a particular focus on providing clear statements
of belief that are easy for others to disagree with.

Many of these probably require deeper articulation, I am trying to
resist the urge to articulate them. If there is one that you'd like to
discuss, I'm happy to elaborate as much as you need.

By self-work I mean "things that are sort of like therapy". Anything
that is designed to in some way change your experience of yourself as a
person, your emotional responses, etc.

1.  You can, and probably should, change your nature as a person.
    a.  "Self-acceptance" in the sense of not constantly beating
        yourself up is important and you should do that one.
    b.  "Self-acceptance" in the sense that you're fine as you are and
        don't need to change is bad for you and bad for others.
    c.  You can get better at things that matter with you.
    d.  Things that make you unhappy or hurt others are problems, and
        you can likely fix them or work around them.
    e.  Very little of the things that you think of as inherent features
        of yourself are actually immutable. If you want to change or
        compensate for them you probably can.
        i.  But it's sometimes going to be a lot of work.
        ii. And sometimes you're better off just leaning into them.

2.  What you do matters.
    a.  People will evaluate you based on your actions and they are
        right to do so.
    b.  Self-work fundamentally needs to start with acting in the world.
    c.  It is important to change how you think and feel, but it is more
        important to change what you do and change the others in support
        of that.
    d.  By this I mean change *now*, not later when you're done healing.

3.  Self-work can and should be directed towards becoming a morally
    better person.
    a.  Without this, it is doomed to fail.
    b.  Attempting "ethics-free" self work will likely make you a
        morally worse person.
    c.  One of the central links between self-work and ethics is your
        relationship with guilt.
    d.  Becoming a morally better person does not usually mean feeling
        guiltier.
    e.  Feeling easily overwhelmed with guilt is in fact a moral
        failing.
    f.  Never feeling guilt is also a moral failing.
        i.  Either you've suppressed the feeling of guilt, which means
            you can't tell when you're doing a bad thing.
        ii. Or you're over-scrupulously avoiding doing anything that
            makes you feel guilty, in which case you are ineffective.

4.  Conversely, ethics is fundamentally grounded in self-work.
    a.  It is useless to ask what you should do in the abstract, because
        the most important ethical question is "How do I become the sort
        of person who does that?"
    b.  Making yourself miserable in the pursuit of ethics probably in
        the long run produces worse results than learning how to be
        happy being a good person.

5.  Community building is vitally important for both self-work and
    ethical development.
    a.  Self-work is fundamentally interpersonal, because being a person
        is fundamentally in relationship to others.
    b.  If you do not have a community supporting your self-work you
        will fail.
    c.  If you are leading such a community, your self-work needs to at
        least be partly directed to being the sort of person who can
        lead a community, or your community will fail and it will be
        your fault.

6.  Moral realism is clearly fake and distracts from the actual role of
    realism in ethics.
    a.  Ethics shape actions and actions have consequences.
    b.  Ethics shapes relationships and relationships shape people.
    c.  There is no objective point of view for ethics. Ethics starts
        from subjects and their relationships to others.
    d.  A core feature of ethics is "alliance building" - I behave this
        way because you agree to also behave in a complementary way.
    e.  But ethics goes beyond alliance building because of the way
        group norms shape people. It's not just about building alliances
        but about *becoming the sort of person with whom explicit
        alliances are not needed*.
    f.  Moral language is in one sense just expressing a personal
        preference, but these preferences are not devoid of content,
        they are rooted in consequences. e.g. engineering has many
        ethical judgements around competence and care that are
        ultimately rooted in preferences like "It is bad when bridges
        fall down".
    g.  When we use moral language we are expressing something that is
        more than personal but less than fully objective - "X is good
        (bad)" means something like "according to the sort of people who
        I would consider good, X is (un)desirable, usually based on its
        outcomes, but sometimes something intrinsic about it."

7.  Ethics is fundamentally about conflict in the Schelling sense - the
    best thing for me is not the best thing for you and vice versa, but
    there is an outcome where we cooperate that is better for each of us
    than not cooperating.
    a.  Contra Schelling, we change our values each time we cooperate.
        By cooperating with you we build trust and love, and I value
        your wellbeing more, and vice versa, and this lowers the level
        of conflict because a good outcome for the other is also a good
        outcome for us.
    b.  By repeatedly cooperating we become the sort of people who value
        cooperating.
    c.  It is also important to value not cooperating with people who
        don't cooperate. Altruistic punishment when someone behaves
        selfishly is an important part of this sort of interaction.

8.  Judging people is good and is an important form of altruistic
    punishment.

    a.  Many people fall short of their own standards, and it is right
        and proper to note that and think less well of them for that.
    b.  You should have standards for other people that are at least as
        stringent as "Does not fail by their own standards". e.g.
        Someone not treating others as well as you feel they deserve,
        regardless of whether they agree with you.
    c.  This judgement does not require an objective morality to be
        useful and important. These are judgements by *your* moral
        standards.
    d.  These moral standards are how you decide what sort of person to
        be.
    e.  These moral standards are also how you decide what sort of
        relationships to have.
    f.  In many ways those are the same thing.

9.  Helping people is good.

    a.  I think most people are reasonably altruistic and will feel good
        if they help others, and that if this is not the case they
        probably have unlearned altruism somewhere along the way.
    b.  Regardless of whether you are intrinsically altruistic, being in
        a community that helps others is selfishly better than being in
        a community where people don't help each other.
    c.  One of the ways you should help others is to help them live up
        to their own standards.

10. Punishing people is good.
    a.  When people fall short of your ethical standards, you can and
        should make them experience consequences for that.
    b.  By default this shouldn't go much further than expressing
        disapproval and maybe downgrading the relationship.
    c.  This is how you express your preferences for what sort of person
        to be in community with.
    d.  Sometimes this will result in breaking the relationship. This is
        a failure, possibly a big one, but it is usually better than not
        having attempted correction, and often better than many
        "successes" (e.g. having to put a huge amount of work into
        fixing a relatively unimportant relationship).
    e.  For severe ethical failures it can and should go further (call
        outs, getting them fired, reporting for crimes, etc. In some
        cases physical violence may be appropriate though I'm not
        personally a fan)
    f.  Without punishment for transgression of shared norms,
        communities die.
    g.  Ideally punishment goes hand in hand with helping - "I will hold
        you to high standards and help you achieve them" but this isn't
        always possible.

11. Competence is a moral issue.
    a.  It's no good having good intentions if you won't put in the work
        to be able to act on them.
    b.  Helping people learn to competently act on your shared ethics is
        one of the points of communities.

12. Taking responsibility is good.
    a.  Bad things happen in part because people don't stop them.
    b.  People are over-focused on *not being blamed for bad things*.
    c.  People should focus more on *not wanting bad things to happen*.
    d.  It is definitely possible to take too much responsibility but
        most people do not take enough.
    e.  This will sometimes result in you being blamed more (because you
        got involved and bad things still happen) and being OK with that
        is one of the reasons you need to be comfortable with guilt if
        you are to be more ethical.
    f.  A common failure mode of this is feeling responsible for things
        going badly without actually doing anything to stop them from
        going badly. This is strictly worse than not feeling
        responsible.

13. Thinking about things is good.
    a.  A lot of people in self-work space have had a very disordered
        relationship with thinking in the past and so have decided that
        thinking is bad. This makes about as much sense as "I was
        repeatedly punching myself in the face, so I cut off my hands to
        stop myself doing that". Just stop hitting yourself, idiot.
    b.  You shouldn't ignore your feelings when thinking about things
        (you're not doing very good thinking if you are), and you
        shouldn't think to the exclusion of action, but thinking is an
        essential part of the acting/feeling/thinking cognitive
        triangle.
    c.  Done well, thinking is fun.
    d.  Part of why people don't like thinking about things verbally is
        that they are conflict averse. If you express your thoughts too
        clearly then people can disagree with them.
    e.  Rumination is not a central example of thinking, and is an
        example of the thinking/feeling part of the triangle going wrong
        together. You can often break out of rumination by doing
        thinking better - e.g. by writing down your thoughts as clearly
        as you can.

14. Health is heterogenous
    a.  There is a sort of "perfectly spherical idealised human in a
        vacuum" generic version of health that a lot of spiritual and
        therapeutic practices try to push you towards. This is probably
        bad for you.
    b.  The healthy versions of two different people will often look
        very different from each other.
    c.  It is possible to have a very healthy life that is dominated by
        intellectual pursuits.
    d.  It is possible to have a very healthy life that is dominated by
        physical pursuits.
    e.  It is likely that the optimal healthy life for you involves more
        of the generic version of health than you are naturally inclined
        to (e.g. more physical activity, more intellectual activity).

15. Health is not mandatory.
    a.  A healthy life is often something you should be pursuing, but it
        may not be achievable.
    b.  Often it will be achievable but you correctly choose not to
        prioritise it - it's too much work, it's in conflict with other
        important things.
    c.  Even if it's achievable, it may take a long time to achieve.
    d.  Also the world is better with broken people in it. Many of the
        most important changes in modern history have come from people
        who are clearly emotionally unhealthy, and who have given their
        lives to some overriding obsession and made the world a vastly
        better place as a result because e.g. they invented half of the
        vaccines we use today, or popularised stainless steel. Maybe any
        given one of their lives would be better if they were perfectly
        emotionally healthy, but their lives would be worse if the
        *others* were perfectly emotionally healthy.
    e.  Even to the degree that you treat working towards health as
        normatively desirable, nobody is there yet, and punishing people
        for not being perfectly healthy already is unlikely to achieve
        the desired result.

16. Allowing for heterogeneity is important.
    a.  This is because people are heterogenous and don't magically
        become homogenous because you don't approve of that.
    b.  Many people cannot and will not conform to your ideal of how
        people should be, and you need to be able to coexist with them
        without a state of total war.
    c.  Ideally you should be able to form friendships with people who
        are very different from you (although not all differences are
        possible, or desirable, to form friendships across)
    d.  You should certainly be able to support people who are very
        different from you.

17. Exclusive communities are important
    a.  Communities should be more homogenous than the general
        population. It's important to have communities of people who are
        in some sense like you.
    b.  These communities should have a degree of gate keeping to them,
        where people who do not fit the target demographic of the
        community are, if not outright excluded, at least expected to
        expend more effort fitting in.
    c.  In particular these communities establish common knowledge
        within them, and it is reasonable to expect people who do not
        share that common knowledge to acquire it in order to
        participate.
    d.  Communities also allow people to establish norms that would not
        work in the broader world. This can include both stricter norms
        of good behaviour, and also weaker norms in which behaviour that
        would not be tolerated between strangers is permissible.
    e.  One of the functions of such communities is supporting people
        who struggle with the broader world. Ideally by helping them
        navigate it better, but in extreme cases by sheltering them from
        it and providing them an environment in which they can
        nevertheless contribute.

18. Loyalty is important
    a.  People adapt norms for low-context low-trust environments to
        their private relationships, and this makes them bad people.
    b.  A prior relationship with someone is in fact a reason to
        maintain that relationship and treat it as valuable and give
        them more leeway and benefit of the doubt.
    c.  If you're not prepared to do that, you cannot maintain healthy
        relationships.
    d.  This does not mean that you should take arbitrary shit from
        people you are in relationship with, but it does mean that by
        being in that relationship it is reasonable to expect a certain
        degree of collaboration in fixing the problems with it.
    e.  There is a degree of relationship failure past which this is not
        reasonable, but that degree has to be pretty severe or chronic
        before you break off the relationship.
    f.  Because loyalty is important, treating other people's loyalties
        as important is important. Just because you would not form a
        relationship with someone does not mean you should punish other
        people for maintaining such a relationship.

19. Disagreement and conflict are good and important (disclaimer: This
    section is something that I am currently still sorting my shit out
    on. I'm not actually good at it).
    a.  One of the advantages of a high trust relationship is that it
        should be robust enough to support disagreement.
    b.  One advantage of a low importance relationship is that if the
        disagreement breaks it that's no big deal.
    c.  Disagreement clarifies your thinking, and thinking is good.
    d.  It also is the basis for understanding and improving your shared
        norms.
    e.  If we cannot disagree, we cannot find the places where we agree.
    f.  Disagreement is foundational in being able to orient towards
        good together.

# Afterword

This feels unsatisfyingly lacking in an ending that pulls everything
together, but I think that's part of the point of writing it - I still
haven't figured out how to pull all of this together. I still think it's
mostly correct and important though.
