# Journaling as a foundational practice

This is another draft bankruptcy, excerpted from another abandoned book
project. Most of the rest of the project is very sketchy but this is one
of the more fleshed out chapters.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Journaling is writing about your life, ideally every day, in a way that
helps you observe key things about it, understand them, and start to
improve them. It returns you to the question of what's going on in your
life and how you can understand it and improve it over and over again.
It helps you figure out what matters to you.

If there is one thing that I wish I had kept up as a practice throughout
the last five years, it's daily journaling. Every time I've done it it's
been important and transformative and then for one reason or another
I've just... stopped.^[Editor's note: Don't ask how well I'm doing on this
right now please...]

Continuity of journaling practice is hard, and the design of the
practice matters both for feeling like you're getting something out of
it and for making it robust against failure.

Here is what I currently consider an ideal journaling practice:

Journaling is done by hand, with a fountain pen, in an A5 notebook. For
reference, [I use this one](https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B0B8M88JW9), and I think
it's reasonably well designed for the purpose, but it's nothing special.
Write on some flat surface, with your arm well supported (note: I am
still figuring out ideal writing posture, and may need to update this
advice). Pages in the journal should be dated. I usually only add a date
for the first page of every day (dating every page is also fine, I just
rarely bother). I have a dedicated writing desk from which phones and
computers are banned, but this may be hard to find space for.

You should have a foundational journaling prompt that you use every day.
The idea of the foundational prompt is that it takes you straight into
just writing without having to make decisions about what to write about,
and it creates a diverse range of different starting points to get you
to examine things from many different angles.

Mine is this: I draw a tarot card from a standard Rider-Waite-Smith
deck, I consult Joan Bunning's "Big Book of Tarot" entry for that card.
I read the description of the card out loud. I then write two pages
inspired by it. "Inspired" can be anything that feels right. Often I
pick out some characteristic from the list of characteristics that
describes some problem I'm currently having. Sometimes the card lands
with a big "ouch, too accurate" and I know exactly what to write.
Sometimes the card completely fails to land and I instead describe the
*absence* of the card's qualities from my life. If the card is a court
card I often talk about what it would be like to be the person
represented.

If you are comfortable with Tarot (this does not require attributing any
mystical significance to it. I don't), I recommend adopting this as your
specific practice. If you want to try it out without committing to
buying a deck and the book, you can use
[https://randomtarotcard.com/](https://randomtarotcard.com/)
for your card draw and look up the card in
[http://www.learntarot.com/cards.htm](http://www.learntarot.com/cards.htm)
(which is by the same author as the book I use, but the book often has
expanded descriptions).

If you're not comfortable with tarot, I'll list some alternative prompts
further down.

(Note: In actual fact I currently do not my foundational journaling in
my journal, I'm doing it on A4 sheets, because I started it as a project
of working through the deck one card at a time without replacement and
introduced the journal midway through and want to complete the deck
before I switch over to the journal. This section may be updated if I
discover that the switchover doesn't work, but I have used a tarot deck
this way in the past and expect it to work fine)^[Editor's note: This project has now
been completed. See [Completing completable projects](https://drmaciver.substack.com/p/completing-completable-projects)]

The goal is that the foundational journaling should be done by noon. If
you notice that it is after noon, you should treat it as a matter of
some urgency to go complete it.

Immediately after you have done your foundational journaling, you will
ideally write another page of journaling about anything you feel like
writing about. If literally nothing comes to mind, don't worry about it.
This page is not a requirement of the practice, it's just a point at
which you are invited to journal.

In general, you should try to journal in whole pages. Keep writing until
the page is full, and then stop. As you notice you're coming to the end
of a page, try to sum up or fine some appropriate way to drop the mic at
the end.

Something else I find useful is to light a candle while journaling. The
way the candle works is that it serves as a sort of anchor: If the
candle is lit, I'm supposed to be journaling. If I notice it is lit, I
should make a decision to go back to journaling or snuff it out. As long
as I've completed my foundational journaling, it's fine to choose to
stop journaling, the candle just serves as a reminder to make the
decision.

Throughout the day if at any point you feel like you need to think
something through or want to express something, go write a page in your
journal about it. The ideal is to cultivate the journal as something you
*want* to use and keep going back to. There is no such thing as too much
journaling as long as most pages you write in your journal feel
productive to have written.

## Debugging Notes

This is a good opportunity to practise debugging.^[Editor's note: This
is partly a reference to a previous chapter on debugging in this book
attempt, but I never actually wrote that chapter. I may attempt to turn
its stub into a notebook post at some point soon.] Chances are, if you
try to copy the above verbatim, you'll run into some problems. I don't
know what they are (if you do run into some problems, please tell me!
I'd like to debug them with you)

I promise that the daily journaling habit is going to be worth it, so
it's worth spending some time figuring out why it isn't working for you
and changing that.

Here are some variants you can try for the physical form:

1.  You can, if you must, journal on the computer. I think it's a bad
    idea, but the best system is the one you can actually follow, so if
    you hate handwriting and can't bring yourself to do it, don't.
2.  You can reduce the volume of journaling, either by writing fewer
    pages, switching to a smaller journal, allowing yourself to stop at
    the half page mark, etc.
3.  You could journal on disposable paper - write it on an A4 sheet and
    then shred it if you don't want to keep it around.
4.  Experiment with different pens and journals. Do you hate fountain
    pens? Do you prefer squared over lined? etc.

For the content you could try different foundational practices. e.g.

1.  Pick some book of special significance to you (a bible for example,
    but it could also be a favourite novel) and use that as a source of
    prompts. Turn to a random page, read the page out loud, and focus in
    on some passage that feels salient in some way.
2.  Rather than having a special book, you could have a book that you
    rotate. Pick some book of your shelves, use that for a while. When
    you feel like moving on after journaling, switch it out for
    something else.
3.  A variation on the above is that rather than random pages you could
    work through the book sequentially - read a few pages before
    journaling until you find something

The core of the foundational practice is that it needs a random prompt
to get you started, and those random prompts have to have a reasonable
amount of range, and a lot of flexibility for interpreting them.

Another common way the journaling practice is likely to fail is that you
just stop doing it. Usually you forget to do it one day, and it makes it
easier to forget to do it the next, etc. The practice I described above
has a number of features designed to offset that:

1.  It has a specific centre that is easy to return to (do your
    foundational journaling before noon).
2.  It makes that centre easy to achieve (it uses a random prompt)
3.  It has the candle as an anchor to help stabilise the practice.
4.  Similarly it has a physical book for that.

But these are all predicated on the fact that it's relatively easy for
me to find time in the morning to do it, and I have a good physical
space for it. Your problems might be different.

The core thing to do though is to decide:

1.  When are you going to do your journaling?
2.  What are you going to do when you miss that slot?
3.  Where are you going to do your journaling?
4.  What are you going to do if you're not able to do it there? (e.g.
    because traveling)

For me the answers are:

1.  Ideally while I drink my morning coffee, but any time before noon is
    fine.
2.  As soon as I can after noon I go do my journaling.
3.  At my writing desk.
4.  I'll bring my journal with me and try to do some journaling on the
    right schedule, but it often won't be my foundational practice
    because I don't have the tarot deck I'm using with me.

## Afterword

This excerpt was a good reminder that I should try to journal more
reliably again. I haven't stopped doing it, but I probably average
about once a week.

Partly this is because this daily writing project is taking up
the time slot that would otherwise be used for journalling.
