# Different ways of struggling for words

Recently, Lisa and I were having a conversation in which I was struggling to express myself about some things I was feeling, and in the course of doing so we came to a very useful realisation about a way in which our internal experiences are quite different, and as a result something she does in these conversations that would be helpful for her is unhelpful for me. I suspect variation here is common, and I thought it would be worth writing it up.^[To be clear, this was a very good conversation and Lisa was excellent throughout. I'm writing about this because I thought the difference between us was interesting, not to complain about my partner. She's great. A+ grade in this conversation. Would partner again.]

Specifically... often during emotional conversations I will go *very slow*. My sentences will come out haltingly, with long pauses between words. Lisa will then try to complete these sentences for me. This is a natural thing to do, and something that it other contexts is very helpful, but when I'm trying to express something I'm feeling is actually extremely unhelpful. The particularly surprising thing to her was that it's unhelpful *even when the completion is correct*.

I think there are two common experiences that this sort of halting speech looks like:

1. Aphasia, when you're having a "tip of your tongue" moment and can't find the right word.
2. When you know what you want to say but are scared to say it, or can't find a tactful way to say it, or are in some other ways inhibited from it.

In these two cases, which I do experience, someone completing my sentence for me is quite helpful.^[Actually, I sortof don't like it when people do this when I'm having aphasia. Lisa used the analogy of "Is it like how tying a child's shoes for them after they should be able to do it for themself stops them figuring it out?". And for the main thing I want to talk about, it's not like that, but for aphasia it actually is. Completing my sentence for me when I'm having aphasia stops me from finding the right route through my memory to the word. But *in the moment* it's still very helpful.] I'm trying to communicate a specific thing, and the other person being able to fill it in is very helpful.


